ra Iflaritima '^ tries 



ORA MAF^ITIMA 

A LATIN STORY FOR BEGINNERS 



PROF E.A.SONNENSCHEIN,D.LITT. 




ORA MARITIMA 



BOUGHT WITH THE INCOME 
FROM THE 

SAGE ENDOWMENT FUND 

THE GIFT OF 

1891 

A.l.kl2LP. nlfXlM 



5931 



Cornell University Library 



arV11170 
Ora maritima 



3 1924 031 202 850 
olin,anx 




Cornell University 
Library 



The original of tliis book is in 
tine Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924031202850 



ORA MARITIMA 



A LATIN STORY FOR BEGINNERS 



WITH GRAMMAR AND EXERCISES 



E. A. SONNENSCHEIN, D.Litt., Oxon. 

Professor of Latin and Gkepk in the 
University of Birmingiiah*'/ 



Natura non facit saltum 



', It 



SEVENTH 




EDITION 



LONDON 

KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO., LIM°- 
BROADWAY HOUSE, CARTER LANE, E.C. 



PREFACE 

My apology for adding another to the formidable array of 
elementary Latin manuals is that there is no book in existence 
which satisfies the requirements which I have in mind as of most 
importance for the fruitful study of the language by beginners. 
What I desiderate is : — 

1. A continuous narrative from beginning to end, capable of 
appealing in respect of its vocabulary and subject matter to the 
minds and interests of young pupils, and free from all those 
syntactical and styhstic difficulties which make even the easiest of 
latin authors something of a problem. 

2. A work which shall hold the true balance between too much 
and too little in the matter of systematic grammar. In my 
opinion, existing manuals are disfigured by a disproportionate 
amount oi lifeless Accidence. The outcome of the traditional system 
is that the pupil learns a multitude of 'Lz.'axi forms (Cases, Tenses, 
Moods), but very little Latin. That is to say, he acquires a 
bowing acquaintance with all the forms of Nouns and Verbs — 
such as Ablatives in a, e, i, o, u, 3rd Persons in al, el, it, and so 
forth — before he gets a real hold of the meaning or use of any of 
these forms. But, as Goethe said in a different connexion, "What 
one cannot use is a heavy burden " ; and my experience leads me 
to think that a multitude of forms acts as an encumbrance to the 
pupil at an early stage by distracting his attention from the more 
vital matters of vocabulary, sentence construction, and order of 
words. The real meaning of the Ablative, for instance, can be 
just as well learned from the ist Declension as from all the 
declensions taken together. And further, to run over all the 
declensions without proper understanding of their meanings and 



vl. PREFACE 

uses with and without Prepositions is a real danjer, as begetting 
all sorts of misconception and error — so much so that the muddled 
pupil too often never learns the syntax of the Cases at all. No 
cloubt all the Declensions and Conjugations must be learned be- 
fore a Latin author is attacked. But when a few of them have 
been brought within the pupil's ken, he finds little difficulty in 
mastering the others in a rapid and more mechanical fashion. In 
the present book I have dealt directly with only three declensions 
of Nouns and Adjectives and the Indicative Active of sum and of 
the 1st Conjugation (incidentally introducing some of the forms of 
Pronouns, and those forms of the Passive which are made up with 
the Verb-adjectives, as in English); but in connexion with tiis 
amount of Accidence I have treated very carefully the most 
prominent uses of the Cases with and without Prepositions, and 
the question of the order of words, which I have reduced to a few 
simple rules. It is my hope that teachers who trust themselves to 
my guidance in this book will agree with me in thinking that the 
time spent on such fundamental matters as these is not thrown 
away. The pupil who has mastered this book ought to be able to 
read and write the easiest kind of Latin with some degree of 
fluency and without serious mistakes : in a word, Latin ought to 
have become in some degree a living language to him. 

Above all it is my hope that my little story may be read with 
pleasure by those for whom it is meant. The picture which it 
gives of the early Britons is intended to be historically correct, so 
far as it goes; and the talk about "anchors" and "boats" and 
"holidays" will perhaps be acceptable as a substitute for "iustitia," 
" modestia," " temperantia," and the other abstract ideas which 
hover like ghosts around the gate of Latin.^ I have kept my 
Vocabulary strictly classical, in spite of the temptation to introduce 



' "The pupil ordinarily approaches Latin and Greek through a cloud t) 
abstractions"— h. Sidgwick. 



PREFACE vii. 

topics of purely modem interest, such as bicycles : in the later 
sections of the- book it is Caesarian. The number of wordis in the 
vocabulary is relatively large ; but words are necessary if anything 
worth saying is to be said, and a large proportion of my words have 
a close resemblance to the English words derived from them. Apart 
from this, the acquisition of a worlting vocabulary is an essential 
part .of any real mastery of a language, and it is a task eniinently 
within the powers of the youthful miind. 

In regard to the quasi-inductive study of grammar I have 
expressed myself in an article contributed to Mr. Sadler's Special 
Reports, extracts from which are given below. But T wjsh it to be 
understood that there is nothing in this book to prevent itsbeing 
used by teachers who prefer the traditional method of teaching the 
Grammar before the sections of the story and the Exercises in 
which it is embodied. All the Grammar required is given in the 
"Preparations" (e.g. pp. 65, 66, 67, 69, etc.) It will be clear 
from these tables and from my " Drill Exercises " that I by no 
means undervalue the importance of systematic training of the 
memory in the early stages of learning. 

In the present edition (1908) I have marked the naturally long 
vowels in the text, as in the "Preparations" and the alphabetical 
vocabulary. But 1 have deliberately abstained from burdening 
the memory of pupils and teachers with subtleties of pronunciation, 
such as are involved in the marking of " hidden quantities " (except 
in such obvious cases as rex,- lux, nonduni) : e.g. rexi from re^o, 
text from iego, constat but condit, Infert but mtulif, iiisanus but 
inculius. If a warning is needed against encumbering the teach- 
ing of Latin with difficult questions of this kind, it will be found 
emphatically expressed in the recommendations of many of the 
Lehrptdne issued by German educational authorities. 

Most of the passages will be foun^ too long for one lesson, 
unless with older pupils. They must be split up, according to 
circumstances. 



viii. PREFACE 

It is possible that some teachers may prefer to use this book 
not as a first book in the strict sense of the term, but rather after 
say a year's work at some other book ; and I can well imagine 
that it might be used to good purpose in this way, for instance as 
a bridge to Caesar, whose invasions of Britain are narrated in out- 
line in my Chapters VIII.- XIV., or for practice in rapid reading 
side by side with an author. 

My best thanks are due to Lord Avebury for permission to 
reproduce the photographs of Roman and British coins which 
appear in this volume, especially of the coin of Antoninus Pius 
with the figure of Britannia upon it — the prototype of our modern 
penny. 

E. A. S. 
Birmingham, 

November, igo8. 



The following passages have struck me since my Preface was 
written as throwing light on the idea of this book. 

" The real question is not whether we shall go on teaching Latin, 
but what we can do to teach it so as to make learners understand that 
it is not a dead language at all." — Sir F. POLLOCK, in the ' Pilot,' 
Jan. I2th, 1901. 

" We must convince our pupils of the reality of the study [Latin] 
by introducing them at as early a period as possible to a real book" — 
P. A. Barnett in " Common Sense in Education and Teaching," 

p. 2ZO. 

"Assimilate the system of teaching the classical languages to that 
which T have shadowed forth for modern language teaching.^ — 
Professor Mahaffy, Address to Modem Language Association, 
Dec, 1901. 



CONTENTS 



Newer Methods in the Teaching of Latin 



Pagb 

1 1 



TEXT. 

I. — OrA MARiriMA 



II. — Patruus meus 

III. — MONUMENTA ANTIQUA 

IV. — Delectamenta puerorum 
V. — Magister noster ■ 
VI. — Britannia antiqua - 



VII. — Vestigia Romanorum - 



I St Declension, with the 
Present Indicative of 
sum and of the ist 
Conjugation 

2nd Declension in -us 



2,nd Declension; words 
\i\iiepuer - 

2nd Declension ; words 
like magister 

Mixed forms of ist and 
2nd Declension, with 
Past Imperfect Indic- 
ative of sum and of 
the ist Conjugation 
(Active Voice) - 

- The other Tenses of 
the Indicative of 
sum and of the 
ist Conjugation 
(Active Voice) 



23 
26 



2nd Declension in um - 28 



30 



32 



33 



38 



CONTENTS 



VIII. EXPEDITIO PRIMA C. lULIl 

Caesaris - 

IX. — Pax violata 

X. — Certamina varia 

XL — Naves E.omai*ae 

XII. — Gentium Britannicarum 
Societas 

XIII. — ft(^RiA Britannica - 

XIV. — i^TANNIA PACATA 
XVI. — ROBUH ET AES TRIPLEX 



.^rd Declension - 



Recapitulation of 31 J 
Declension - 



Adjectives of 3rd 
i- {,'f( Declension - 

PREPARAiriONS AND GR.\MMAR - 
DRILL. EX|;RCISES ON THE TEXT 

Latin, Drill, Conversations, etc., with English 
sentences for rc-translation - - 

APPENDICES 

I. How to translate the Latin Gerundive and Gerund 
IL riSpw .to translate the principal English Prepositions 

LA 1JJ\' ENGLISH VOCABULARV 



Pagi 

43 
45 
46 

48 

49 
SI 



55 
S9 



138 
141 

US 



NEWER METHODS IN THE 
TEACHING OF LATIN 



We are familiar with the watchwords of two opposed camps on 
the subject of language-teaching. The old-fashioned view that 
the " declining of nouns and verbs," to use Dr. Johnson's phrase, 
is a necessary preliminary to the reading of any text is nowadays 
met with the continental cry of " Fort mit der Grammatik ! " 
But we are not really compelled to accept either of these harsh 
alternatives, as the more moderate adherents of the new Germain 
school are now fain to admit. Grammar has its proper place 
in any systenTatised method of teaching a language ; but that 
place is not at the beginning but rather at the end of each of the 
steps into which a well-graduated course must be divided. 
Speaking of the course as a whole, we may say that the learning 
of grammar should proceed side by side with the reading of a 
text. The old view, which is far from extinct at the present day, 
though it is rarely carried out in all its rigour, was that the pupil 
must learn the rules of the game before he attempts to play it. 
The modern view is that just as in whist or hockey one learns 
the rules by playing the game, so in the study of a language one 
learns the grammar best by the reading of a simple text. But 

* Extracted frnm an article contributed to Mr. Sadler's Special Reports. 



12 NEWER METHODS IN THE TEACHING OF LATIN 

it is necessary at once to draw a distinction, which marks the 
difference between the earlier and the more developed form of 
the new method. The mistake made by the first zealots of the 
new school was that they plunged the pupil without pre- 
paration into the reading of what were called " easy passages," — 
passages taken from any ordinary book, and easy perhaps as 
compared with other passages which might have been selected, 
but still bristling with a multitude of heterogeneous forms 
and constructions. This was an "inductive method" with a 
vengeance ; but it soon became evident that to expect a young 
beginner to work his way through such a jungle to the light of 
clear grammatical consciousness was to expect too much ; * and 
even for the adult beginner the process is slow and laborious. 
For what is the object of grammar unless to make the facts of a 
language accessible and intelligible by presenting them in a 
simple arrangement ? Here as elsewhere science ought surely to 
step in as an aid, not an obstacle, to understanding. What 
the advocates of the new school failed to see was that 
" nature " cannot dispense with " art " ; in other words that the 
text which is to serve as the basis of an inductive study of the 
language must be specially constructed so as to exhibit those 
features on which the teacher desires to lay stress at a particular 
stage of learning. 

What is the ordinary English practice at the present day? 
On this point others are more competent to speak than I ; but 
I imagine I am not far wrong in saying that the first step in 
learning Latin is to spend a month or two in learning declensions 
and conjugations by rote — not, let us hope, complete with 
their irregularities and exceptions, but in outline. The pupil 



* A distinguished representative of the Neuere Riclitung admitted in 
conversation with the present writer some years ago that the teaching of 
French out of his own book was " Hundesarbeit " (A<»««-work. ) 



NEWER METHODS IN THE TEACHING OF LATIN 1 3 

then proceeds to the reading and writing of easy sentences, 
perhaps in such a book as " Gradatim " ; and after say a 
year or more he will be reading easy selections from a Latin 
author. All the while he recapitulates his grammar and ex- 
tends his grammatical horizon. This is, in any case, an 
immense improvement on the older plan of learning the whole 
of the old Eton Latin Grammar in its Latin dress without 
understanding a word of what is meant by its " as in praesenti " 
and other mysteries. If wisely administered, this method may 
also avoid the error of " Henry's First Latin Book," which 
taught an intolerable deal of Accidence and Syntax to a half- 
pennyworth of text ; though, on the other hand, Henry's First 
Latin Book was an attempt to accompany the learning of 
grammar with the reading of easy sentences from the very 
beginning, and in so far was better than the method we are con- 
sidering. For I must maintain, with all deference to the opinion 
of others whose experience is wider than my own, that we are as 
yet far from having drawn the full conclusions of the process of 
reasoning on which we have entered. There should be no pre- 
liminary study of grammar apart from the reading of a text. The 
declensions and conjugations, learned by rote apart from their appli- 
cations, cannot be properly assimilated or understood, and often 
prove a source of error rather than enlightenment in subsequent 
study. They have to be learned over and over again — always in 
doses which are too large for digestion, and the pupil has mean- 
while been encouraged to form a bad habit of mind. Half know- 
ledge in this case too often leads to the unedifying spectacle of the 
Sixth Form boy or the University undergraduate who is still so 
shaky in his accidence that he cannot pass his " Smalls " without a 
special effort, though in some respects he may be agood scholar. 
But still more serious is the effect of the false conceptions which are 
inevitably implanted in the mind by this method of grammar with- 
out understanding. The pupil learns mensa, " by or with a table," 



14 NEWER METHODS IN THE TEACHING OF LATIN 

agricola, " by or with a farmer " — both of them impossible Lai in for 
the English in its natural sense; iiiensae meaning strictly "to a table;" 
is almost impossible in any elementary context. Yet the pupil 
necessarily supposes that in some context or other they must have 
those meanings ; it is often years before he discovers that he has 
been the victim of a practical joke. Some boys never see the fun 
to the bitter end ; in other words, they never learn the syntax of 
the Cases at all. And where are the counterbalancing advantages 
of this method? The pupil is introduced at an early stage to the 
reading of selections from Latin authors. But what if the interest 
and stimulus of reading consecutive passages could be secured 
without the sacrifice of clearness and grasp which is involved in 
the method of preliminary grammar? The advantages would 
seem in that case to be all on one side. Each new grammatical 
feature of the language would be presented as it is wanted, in an 
interesting context, and would be firmly grasped by the mind ; at 
convenient points the knowledge acquired would be summed up 
in a table (the declension of a noun or the forms of a tense). 
The foundations of grammar would thus be securely laid ; 
there would be no traps for the understanding, because each new 
feature would be presented in concrete form, that is in a context 
which explained it. For example, instead oimensa, "by or with a 
table,'' etc., we should have in mensa, " on a table," cum agricolA, 
" with a farmer," ab agricola, " by a farmer " ; dd mensam, " to a 
table " or sometimes " by {i.e. near) a table ; '' agricolae dat, but 
not mensae dat. After one declension had been caught in this 
way, the others would not need so elaborate a treatment. But still 
the old rule of "festina lente" would warn the teacher not to im- 
pose too great a burden on the young or even the adult beginner ; 
it io no light task to learn simultaneously forms and their 
meanings, vocabulary, and the fundamental facts of syntax. It 
must be admitted that the method which I am advocating is a slow 
one at first ; but it is sure, and binds fast. The method of pre- 



NEWER METHODS IN THE TEACHING OF LATIN 15 

liminary grammar might be called the railroad method. The 
traveller by rail travels fast, but he sees little of the country 
through which he is whirled. The longest way round is often the 
shortest way home; and my experience has been that the time 
spent at the start without proceeding beyond the very elements of 
grammar is time well spent. A fair vocabulary is acquired — 
without effort^n the course of reading; for the learning of new 
wdrds, especially if they are chosen so as to present obvious 
similarities to English words, is a task eminently -within the 
powers of the youthful mind; and all words met with in an 
interesting context arouse attention and impress themselves on the 
mind of their own accord. All the while the pupil is forming his 
feeling for the language and gradually becoming habituated 
to ordinary ways of saying ordinary things. He gradually loses 
that sense of strangeness which is the great barrier to anything like 
mastery.* It is surprising how much can be said in Latin without 
using more than a single declension of nouns and adjectives and 
a single conjugation of verbs, f The habit of reading very easy 
Latin, thus acquired at an early stage, will pro.ve of the utmost 
value when the pupil approaches the study of a, Latin author. 
Such a book as I have in mind should therefore do something to 
bridge over the formidable chasm which at; present separates the 
reading of isolated sentences from the reading of an author. 

All Latin authors as they stand, are far too. difficult to 
serve as a basis of study for beginners : and they are also, I 
may add, not well adapted in respect of subject matter and 



*One great advantage of this method, especially fpr learners who are 
able to cover. the' ground at a fair rate of progress, is that it lends itself to 
acquiring the "art oi reading Latin" (as distinct from the art oi construingit), 
to use Prof. W. G. Hale's phrase — the art of rapid reading. 

( There are some 1,000 verbs of the first conjugation in Latin (including 
compounds). 



l6 NEWER METHODS IN THE TEACHING OF LATIN 

sentiment to appeal to the mind of the very young. Caesar may 
no doubt be made interesting to a boy or girl of twelve by a skilful 
teacher with the aid of maps and pictures. But, after all, the Gallic 
War can never be what it was never meant to be, a child's book. 
The ideal " Reader," which should be the centre of instruction 
during the early stages of a young pupil's course, should be really 
interesting ; simple and straightforward in regard to its subject 
matter, modern in setting, and as classical as may be in form — a 
book which the pupil may regard with benevolent feelings, not 
with mere "gloomy respect,"* as worth knowing for its own sake. 
It should be well illustrated with pictures, diagrams, and maps, 
provided always that the illustrations are to the point, and such as 
are really felt to be needed to explain the text and make it live. 
" Modern in setting," for otherwise the book will not appeal to the 
young mind ; yet there is much justification for the demand made 
by many adherents of the newer school that the subject matter 
of any school book dealing with a foreign language should be 
closely associated with the history and the manners and customs 
of the people who spoke or speak the language. Possibly the two 
demands are not irreconcilable ; the subject matter may be 
historical and national, but the point of view from which it is 
regarded may be modern. For English pupils learning Latin the 
reconciliation ought to present little difficulty ; but nearly every 
great nation of Europe has its points of contact with Rome, and 
therefore its opportunities of constructing Latin Readers which are 
national in more senses than one. On the modern side they may 
be patriotic in tone, and inspired by that love of nature which 
appeals so directly to the youthful mind j on the ancient side they 
may be historical and instructive in the narrower sense of the 
term. And the illustrations should also have this two-fold 
character ; they should include subjects both ancient and modern, 

* Lord Rosebery in his Rectorial Address at Glasgow, 1900, 



NEWER METHODS IN THE TEACHING OF LATIN 17 

it being always remembered in regard to the former that their 
object is not to make the boy or girl an archaeologist, but simply 
to act as an aid to the imagination and enable it to realise what 
ancient civilisation was like. A good modern fancy sketch may 
often be more instructive from this point of view than a cut taken 
from a dictionary of antiquities. 

The method which I advocate is, therefore, on its linguistic 
side, analogous in some respects to the so-called "natural method " 
or to the method by which an adult, left to his own resources, 
usually attempts to master a foreign tongue. He begins by 
attacking some easy book or newspaper, with the help of a 
dictionary, and he picks up the grammar as he goes along. The 
method is in both cases heuretic, in so far as the learner does 
not try to reconstruct the language out of the grammar, as 
a palaeontologist reconstructs an extinct animal from a study of a 
few bones. But in the one case the learner works on a text which 
presents all the variety and complexity of nature ; in the other, on 
a text which has been simplified and systematised by art, so as to 
lead directly to a clear view of certain fundamental grammatical 
facts. Granted the premises, I conceive that there will be no great 
difficulty in accepting the conclusion ; for there can hardly be a 
better method of teaching a language than that which combines the 
systematic order of the grammar with the interest and life of the 
story-book. The crux of the situation is to write such a school book; 
and though it may be long before an ideal book of the kind is pro- 
duced, the problem ought not to be impossible of solution, if once 
the necessity of a solution from the teaching point of view is realised. 
On the one hand the ideal book ought to have a sustained interest, 
and if possible to form a continuous narrative from beginning to 
end J otherwise much of the effect is lost; this adds materially to 
the difficulty of writing. On the other hand there are various 
considerations which lighten the task. The writer has before him 
an infinite variety of choice in regard to his subject matter ; and 



I8 NEWER METHODS IN THE TEACHING OF LATIN 

though his grammatical order must be systematic, he is under no 
obligation to confine himself absolutely to the narrowest possible 
grammatical field at each step. For example adjectives* may be, 
as they should be on other grounds, treated side by side with the 
substantives which they resemble in form, and the easy forms of 
possum {e.g., pot-es, pot-est, pot-erani) side by side with the 
corresponding forms of sum. Here we have material for the 
building of sentences. We may even go further and admit a 
certain number of forms- which anticipate future grammatical 
lessons, provided they are not too numerous or of such a character 
as to confuse the grammatical impression which it is the purpose 
in hand to produce. For example, forms like tnguam, inqutt 
might be introduced, if necessary, long before the learning of the 
defective verbs was reached ; they WQuld, of course, be accom- 
panied by their translations and treated as isolated words without 
any grammatical explanation. Tact in introducing only such forms 
as are not liable to lead to false inferences is necessary ; and, of 
course, the fewer such anticipations there are the better. A 
certain latitude must also be conceded in regard to idiom and 
style. While it is of importance that the pupil should come across 
nothing which might react disadvantageously on his future com- 
position, it is mere pedantry to insist on any exalted standard of 
literary excellence. The writer who works under the limitation 
imposed by the conditions of the problem should not attempt any 
high style of diction ; it is sufficient if his Latin is up to the 
standard of such isolated sentences as usually form the mental 
pabulum of the beginner, though it might well be somewhat 
higher. 

I would here anticipate a possible objection. Would not such 
a book be too easy ? Would it provide a sufficient amount of 
mental gymnastic to serve as a means of training the faculties of 



•Including Possessive Adjectives and Participles (Verb-adjectives). 



NEWER METHODS IN THE TEACHING OF LATIN I9 

reason and judgment ? That would depend altogether on the aim 
which the writer set before himself. There is plenty of room 
within the limits of the first declension and the first conjugation 
for the training of the mind in habits of accurate thought and 
expression ; for instance, the sentences may be made as difficult in 
regard to order of words as you please. But I would urge that 
they can hardly be made too easy at the beginning. It is some- 
times forgotten that mental training is not synonymous with the 
inculcation of a mass of grammatical forms which only burden the 
memory, and that the habit of reading with care and fluency is it- 
self a mental discipline of the highest value. What the teacher of 
any language has to do is not to accustom his pupil to regard each 
sentence as a nut to crack or a pitfall to beware of; but rather to 
induce him by the art of "gentle persuasion" to look upon the 
foreign tongue as a friend to be approached on terms of easy 
familiarity. Difficulties will accumulate fast enough, and I submit 
with all deference that it is a mistake to convert the learning of 
any foreign language into an obstacle race, by deliberately throwing 
difficulties into the path of the learner. Latin, at any rate, is hard 
enough in itself. And a habit of thoughtlessness is surely the last 
thing that will be encouraged by a method such as that sketched 
above, by which learning is made a matter of observation from the 
first, and not of unintelligent memorizing. 

It goes without saying that the grammar to be taught in such 
a book should be limited to the necessary and normal. All that 
is in any way superfluous to the beginner should be rigofously 
excluded. But so soon as a general view of the whole field of 
regular accidence and the bare outlines of syntax has been attained 
by way of the Reader, the time has arrived for taking the pupil 
over the same ground again, as presented in the systematic form 
of the grammar. He is now in a position to understand what a 
grammar really is — not a collection of arbitrary rules, but a 
catalogue raisonni of the usages of a language based upon 



20 NEWER METHODS IN THE TEACHING OF LATIN 

observation and simplified by science. Successive recapitulations 
should take in more and more of what is abnormal, until a fairly 
comprehensive view of the whole field is obtained. The suggestions 
of whatever new texts are read should, of course, be utilised in 
preparing the mind for irregularities and exceptions ; but it is no 
longer perilous to study the grammar apart. Each course of 
grammar deepens the impression made by those which precede it, 
and at the same time extends the pupil's mental horizon, the 
successive courses being superimposed on one another like a 
number of concentric circles with ever widening diameters. 

I have said nothing about the writing of Latin, because it is 
obvious at the present day that reading should be accompanied by 
writing from the first, and, what is even more important, that the 
sentences to be translated into Latin should be based on the 
subject matter and vocabulary of the Reader. Learning a 
language is largely an imitative process, and we must not expect 
our beginners to make bricks without straw, any more than we 
expect pupils at a more advanced age to compose in the style of 
Cicero or Livy without giving them plenty of models to 
work upon. It is more important to insist here on the import- 
ance of training the organs of speech and hearing even in 
learning a "dead language" like Latin. For a dead language 
is still a language, and cannot be properly grasped unless it has 
some contact with living lip and living ear. Let the pupil 
then become accustomed from the first to reading Latin aloud, 
and to reading it with intelligence and expression. It is a 
habit which does not come of itself; but to teach it goes 
a long way towards making the language live again, and acts 
as a most valuable support to the memory. Let anyone try 
learning a little modern Greek, and he will appreciate the 
difference between remembering the accents by ear and remem 
bering them by the eye alone. So, too, in regard to forms 
and vocabulary. What we have to familiarise our pupils with is 



NEWER METHODS IN THE TEACHING OF I-ATIN 21 

not merely the look of the word and the phrase and the sentence 
on paper, but still more, the shape of them to the ear. 

From the point of view of the University a reform in school 
procedure, both on the literary and on the grammatical side, 
would confer great and lasting benefits. * There must be many 
University teachers who, like the present writer, feel dissatisfied 
with the scrappy and haphazard knowledge of the classics 
commonly presented by students reading for Pass degrees. But 
the foundations must be laid during the long school course, as the 
developed flower must be present in the germ. By not hurrying 
over the initial stages, and by a wise guidance of the later steps, the 
consummation of a worthy classical culture may be reached in the 
end. 

Christmas, 1900. E. A. Sonnenschein. 



* Professor Postgate (Classical Review, February, 1901) demands a 
" thorough revision of the modes and materials of classical and especially 
elementary classical teaching," adding, "Though we of the Universities have 
a serious grievance against the schools in that they send us so many mistaught 
on elementary points, and, what is worse, emptied of all desire to learn, we 
must not forget our own deficiencies. " 



NOTE TO THE SIXTH EDITION. 

In ike present issue of this book I have, in deference to the 
wishes of many teachers, returned to the principle of marking long 
vowels in the text, which I adopted in my Parallel Grammar 
Series. As to the method of carrying out the principle I have 
stated my views in the Preface (p. vii). 

/ have also corrected one or two oversights to which T had 
called attention in previous issues {p. iig, I. i, 'sometimes not' 
for '■not always' ; p. 123, II. 4 and 8 of% 2J, ' tenth for seventh'). 
On p. 4.8, I. S, I have substituted ' miilta ex navigiis 'for ' magnus 
nu7nerus navigiornm,' in order to avoid raising a difficulty of con- 
struction. And there are a feiv other minor improvements of this 
kind (p. 130, § 31 B ; p. 144 bottom). But in all essentials the 
book is unchanged. 

I hereivith express my cordial thanks to those teachers who have 
pointed out to me misprints or omissions in the vocabularies — in 
particular to Professor Postgate, Mr. F. E. A. Trayes, Mr. R. S. 
Haydon, Miss A. F. E. Sanders. These oversights — not very 
many in number — have all been corrected in the present issue. 

May I call the attention of teachers to the mistake, into which 
pupils easily fall, of pronouncing the word ' Maritima ' like the 
French ' maritime ' with the accent on the syllable ti-, instead of 
Maritima ? 



ORA MARITIMA 

VEL 

COMMENTARII DE VITA MEA AD 

DUBRAS ANNO MDCCCXCIX 




Ora Maritima inter Dueras et Rutupias. 

I. Ora maritima. 

[First Declension of Nouns and Adjeclives, togelh;r with the Present 
Indicative oi sum and of the First Conjugation.] 

1. Quam bella est ora maritima ! Non procui ■ 
ab ora maritima est villa. In villa amita mea 
habitat ; et ego cum ainita mea nunc habito. Ante 
ianuam viljae est area. In area est castanea, ubi 



24 



ORA MARITIMA 



luscinia intercluni cantat. Sub umbra castaneae ancilla 
interdum cenam parat. Amo 5ram maritimam ; amo 
villam bellam. 

2. Feriae nunc sunt. Inttr lerias in villa 
maritima habits. O beatas ferias ! In arena orae 
maritimae sunt ancorae et catenae. Nam incolae 
orae maritimae sunt nautae. Magna est audacia 
nautarum : procellas non formldant. Nautas amo, ut 
nautae me amant. Cum nautis interdum in scaphls 
navigo. 







Ancora et Catena— Scapha. 



3. Ex fenestrls villae undas spectas. Undas 
caeruleas amo. Quam magnae sunt, quam perlucidae ! 



ORA MARITIMA 25 

Post cenam lunam et stellas ex fenestra mea specto. 
Prope villam est silva, ubi cum amita mea saepe 
ambulo. Quantopere nos silva delectat ! O copiam 
plantarum et herbarum ! O copiam bacarum ! Non 
solum nautae sed etiam agricolae circum habitant. 
Casae agricolarum parvae sunt. Nautae casas albas 
habitant. Amita mea casas agricolarum et nautarum 
saepe visitat. 

4. Victoria est regina mea. Magna est gloria 
Victoriae Reginae, non solum in insulis Britannicis 
sed etiam in India, in Canada, in Australia, in Africa, 
ubi coloniae Britannicae sunt. Regina est domina 
multarum terrarum. Britannia est domina undarum. 
In gloria reginae meae triumpho. Te, Britannia, 
amo : vos, insulae Britannicae, am5. Sed Britannia 
non est patria mea. Ex Africa Meridiana sum. 

5. Lydia cjuoque, consobrlna mea, apud aniitam 
meam nunc habitat. Lydia columbas curat :~ cura 
columbarum Lydiae magnam laetitiam dat. Tu, 
Lydia, cum apud magistram tuam es, linguae Franco- 
gallicae et linguae Anglicae operam das ; sed ego 
linguls antiquis Romae et Graeciae operam do. Saepe 
cum Lydia ad silvam vel ad oram maritimam ambulo. 
Interdum cum nauta in scapha navigamus. Quant- 
opere nos undae caeruleae delectant ! Lydia casas 
agricolarum cum amita mea interdum visitat. Vos, 
filiae agricolarum, Lydiam amatis, ut Lydia vos amat. 
Ubi inopia est, ibi amita mea inopiam levat. 



26 ORA MARITIMA 

II, Patruus meus. 

[Second Declension : Nouns and Adjectives in us]. 

6. Patruus meus quondam praefectus erat in 
Africa Merldiana. Nunc militia vacat, et agello suo 
operam dat. Agellus patrul mei non magnus est. 
Circum villam est hortus. Murus horti non altus est. 
Rivus est prope hortum, unde aquam portamus, cum 
hortum irrigamus. In horto magnus est numerus 
rosarum et violarum. Rosae et violae tibi, ml patrue, 
magnam laetitiam dant. Tu, Lydia, cum patruo meo 
in horto saepe ambulas. 

7. In angulo horti sunt ulmi. In ulmis corvi 
nldificant. Corvos libenter spect5, cum circum nidos 
su5s volitant. Magnus est numerus corvorum in 
horto patrul mei ; multi mergi super oceanum volitant. 
Vos, mergi, libenter specto, cum super oceanum 
volitatis et praedam captatis. Oceanus mergls cibjjm 
dat. Patruum meum hortus et agellus suus delectant ; 
in agello sunt equi et vaccae et porci et galll gallTnae- 
que. Lydia gallos gallinasque cGrat. Non procul 
ab agello est vicus, ubi rustici habitant. NonnullI ex 
rusticis agellum cum equls et vaccis et porcis 
curant. 

8. Ex horto patrul mei scopulos albos orae 
maritimae spectamus. Scopull sunt alti. Et ora 
Francogallica non procul abest. Noctu ex scopulls 
pharos 5rae Francogallicae spectamus, velut Stellas 
claras in oceano. Quam bellus es, oceane, cum luna 



ORA MARITIMA 



27 



undas tuas illustrat ! Quantopere me delectat vos, 
undae caeruleae, spectare, cum tranquillae estis 'et 
arenam orae maritimae lavatis ! Quantopere me 
delectatis cum turbulentae estis et sub scopulis 
spumatis et murmuratis ! 




Villa Maritima. 
Ulmi et Corvi. Murus. Ianua. Rivus, Castanea. Mergi, 



2S ORA MARITIMA 

III. Monumenta antiqua. 

[Nouns and AdjecLives in Jini]. 

9. Agellus patruT mei in Cantio est, inter 
Dubras et lvntu|")iris situs. Dubrae et Rutupiae 
oppida antiqua sunt. Multa simt monumenta antiqua 
in Britannia, multa vestigia Romanorum. Reliquiae 
villarum, oppidorum, amphitheatronuii Romanorum 
hodie exstant. Multae viae Romanae in Britannia 
sunt. Ill Canti5 est via Roniilna inter Rutupias et 
Londiiiiuni. Solum Britannieum multos nummos 
aiireos, argenteus, aeneos et Britannorum et Roman- 
5rum oceultat. Rusticis nummi saepe sunt causa lucri, 








NUMMUS ROM.\NUS CUM FiGUKA BkITANNIAE. 




nummus romanus. 
(C.Idl.Caesar.) (Augustus.) 



ORA MARITIMA 



29 




NUMMUS Eritannicus. 




NuMMUS Eritannicus. 



cum arant vel fundamenta aeclificiorum antTquorum 
excavant. Nam nummos antiques magno pretio 
venumdant. Patruo meo magnus numcrus est nunim- 
orum Romanorum. 

10. Inter ferias commentarios meos de vita 
mea scriptito. Dubras .saepe visitamus ; nam oppidum 
non procul abest. Super oppidum est castellum mag- 
num ; in castello est specula antlqua. Muri speculae 
altl et lati sunt. Quondam erat pharus Romanorum. 
Prope speculam est aedificium consecratum. lam 
secundo saeculo post Christum natum basilica Chris- 
tiana erat. 

11. Castellum in promunturio orae maritimae 
Stat. Post castellum sunt clTvi graminel et lati. Ex 
castello fretum Gallicum spectas. Ante oculos sunt 



^o 



ORA MARITIMA 



\-cla alba nniltoruin na\iL;i"rLim ; iifnigia sunt Brit- 
aniiica, ]'raiicoL;"allica, ( icrmanica, llclyica. Nniinulla 
ex nfiviyaTs Britannicls "castella" iioniinata sunt. 
Littcra C in signo est. " Castella " in AtVieani Meiidi- 
anam na\"iyan_t, iibi patria niea est. 




•■1' 



U\S-i^fjli! H''lit::-~^M^, ,''^4.l.j:!wjjI i-iflitAf 'i-al' ■ 



-i*S3v*ii4',.'a's 



C.\STF.I,T.n.\t All DUBKAS SITUM. 

IV. Delectamenta puerorum. 

[Nouns and AdjecLive^ liku /v/ct], 
12. In nuniero amTcorum mcurum sunt duo 
i:)uerl. Marcus, puer quattuordecim annorum, milii 



ORA MARITIMA 31 

praecipuus amicus est. Prope Dubras nunc habitant, 
sed ex Caledonia oriundl sunt. Nobis puerls feriae 
nunc sunt ; nam condiscipuli sumus. Inter ferias 
llberl sumus scholis. Amici mel me saepe visitant, et 
ego amicos meos visits. Magna est inter nos amicitia. 
Una anibulamus, una in undls spumiferls natamus, 
cum non iiimis asperae sunt. Quantopere nos pueros 
liidi pilarum in arena delectant ! Ut iuvat castella 
contra undas spumiferas aedificare ! 

13. Nobis puerls feriae plenae sunt gaudiorum 
a mane usque ad vesperum. Nonnumquam in scapha 
cum Petro navigamus. Petrus est adulescentulus 
viginti annorum. Petri scapha non solum remis sed 
etiam veils apta est. Plerumque remigamus, sed 
nonnumquam vela damus, cum ventus non nimis 
asper est. Petrus scapham gubernat et veils minis- 
trat. Nos pueri scapham bellam laudamus et amamus. 

14. Non procul a Dubris est scopulus altus, 
unde oceanum et navigia et oram maritimam spectas. 
Locus in fabula commemoratus est, ubi Leir, regulus 
Britannorum antiquorum, fortunam suam miseram 
deplorat, stultitiam suam culpat, filias suas animi 
ingrati accusat. O fortunam asperam ! O filias 
impias ! O constantiam Cordeliae ! Scopulus ex 
poeta nominatus est. Nam in fabula est locus ubi 
vir generosus, amicus fidus reguli, de scopulo se 
praecipitare parat ; sed filius suus virum ex periculo 
servat. Fllium fidum laudo et amo. Nos pueri locum 
-saepe visitamus. 



32 



ORA MARITIMA 



^ 








)(K," 



If 



--^^^■■:=— ^a?^-_ ■> 



ScoruLus Altus ad Dubras situs, ex Poeta Nominatus. 

V. Magister noster. 

[Nouns and Adjectives like magistei\ 

15. Magister noster vir doctus est, sad ludorum 

peritus. Nobis puerls carus est. Inter ferias patruum 

meum interdum visitat. Dextra magistrl nostri valida 

est, et puerl pigri nee dextram nee magistrum amant. 

" Non amo te, Sabidi, nee possum dicere quare. 

Hoc tantum possum dicere : non amo te." 
Magistrum non amant quia libros Graecos et 
Latinos non amant. Nam discfpulT scholae nostrae 
linguTs antlquis operam dant, atque scientils mathe- 



ORA MARITIMA 33 

maticls. Magistro nostro magna copia est librorum 
pulchrorum. Schola nostra antiqua et clara est : non 
solum librls sed etiam ludis operam damus. Schola 
nostra non in Cantio est. In vico nostro est ludus 
litterarius, crcber pueris et puellis, liberls agricolarum. 
Sed ego cum Marco et Alexandro, amicis mels, ad 
Ventam Belgarum discipulus sum. 

VI. Britannia antiqua. 

|Mixed forms of Nouns and Adjectives of the ist and 2nd Declensions, 
together with the Past Imperfect Indicative of sunt and of the 
1st Conjugation.] 

IG. Magister noster librorum historicorum 
studiosus est ; de patria nostra antiqua libenter narrat. 
Proximo anno, dum apud nos erat,de vita Britannorum 
antiqiiorum saepe narrabat. Patruus meus et amita 
mea libenter auscultabant ; ego quoque nonnumquam 
aderam. Sic narrabat : — 

" Fere tota Britannia quondam silvls densis crebra 
erat. Inter oram maritimam et fluvium Tamesam, 
ubi nunc agri frugiferi sunt, silva erat Anderida, locus 
vastus et incultus. Silvae plenae erant ferarum — 
luporum, ursorum, cervorum, aprorum. Multa et varia 
materia erat in silvls Britannicis : sed fagus Britannis 
antlquls non erat nota, si Gaius lulius vera afBrmat. 
Et pinus Scotica deerat." 

17. " Solum, ubi llberum erat silvls, frugiferum 
erat. Metallls quoque multls abundabat — ^plumbo albo 




Britanni Antiqui 



ORA MARITIMA 35 

et ferfo, atque, ut Tacitus affirmat, auro argentoque. 
Margaritas et ostreas dabat oceanus: margaritae 
parvae erant, sed ostreae magnae et praeclarae. 
Caelum turn quoque crebris pluvils et nebulis atrls 
foedum erat ; sed prulnae asperae aberant. Natura 
oceani ' pigra ' erat, si testimonium Taciti verum est : 
nautae RomanI, inquit, in aqua pigra vix poterant 
remigare. Sed verumne est testimonium ? An natura 
nautarum Romanorum non satis impigra erat ? " 

18. " Incolae antlqui insulae nostrae ferl et 
bellicosi erant. HastTs, sagittis, essedls inter se 
pugnabant. Proelia Britannos antiquSs delectabant. 
Multl et diversi erant popull Britannorum. Multl 
ex populls erant Celtae. Celtis antiquls, sicut Ger- 
manls, capilli flavi, ocull caerulei, membra magna 
et robusta erant. Sic Tacitus de CaledoniTs narrat. 
Incolae Cambriae meridianae ' colorati ' erant. Sed 
Romanis statura parva, ocull et capilli nigri erant. 
Universi Britanni, ut Gaius lulius affirmat, membra 
vitro colorabant, sIcut nautae nostri hodierni. Vestl- 
menta ex coriis ferarum constabant. In casTs parvis 
circum silvas suas habitabant." 

19. Hic amita mea " Nonne in oppidls habit- 
abant .'' " inquit. Et ille " Oppida aedificabant," inquit 
''sed, si Gaius lulius vera affirmat, oppida Britann- 
orum antlquorum loca firmata erant, non loca ubi 
habitabant. Sed Britannia meridiana crebra erat 
incolls et aedificiis. Sic narrat Caesar in libr5 quinto 
Belli Gallic!. Multiuna habitabant, ut puto." " Itaque 
non plane barbarl erant," inquit amita mea. ;Et 



36 



OEA MAEITIMA 



ille : " Incolae Cantii agri culturae operam dabant, 
atque etiam mercaturae. Nam Venetl ex Gallia in 
Britanniam mercaturae causa navigabant. BritannI 
frumentum, armenta, aurum, argentum, ferrum, coria, 
catulos venaticos, servos et captlvos exportabant ; 
frena, vitrea, gemmas, cetera importabant. Itaque 
mediocriter humani erant,nec multum divers! a Gallis.' 




Urnab et Catenas Britannicae. 




Druidae Britannici. 



38 01!A MAKITIMA 

20. " Multi mortuos cremabant, sicut Graeci et 
RomanI : exstant in Cantio sepulchra cum urnis 
pulchre ornatls. Exstant etiam nummi BritannicI, 
aurei, argentel, aenel. Esseda quoque fabricabant : 
non plane inhuman! erant, si rotas ferratas essed- 
orum et nummos aureos aeneosque fabricare poterant. 
Britannis antlquls magnus numerus gallorum gallin- 
arumque erat ; animi, non escae, causa curabant, ut 
Gaius lulius affirmat. Sed incolae mediterraneorum 
et Caledonii feri et barbarl erant. Mortuos humabant. 
AgrI culturae operam non dabant ; non frumento sed 
ferina victitabant. Deorum fana in lucis sacrls et silvTs, 
atris erant. Sacra curabant Druidae. Sacra erant' 
saeva : viros, feminas, llberos pro victimis sacrificabant. 
Inter se saepe pugnabant ; captivos miseros venum-' 
dabant, vel cruciabant et trucidabant :. nonnumquam.' 
simulacra magna, plena victimis humanis, cremabant. 
Populorum inter se discordiae victoriam Romanorum 
parabant." 

VII. Vestigia Romanorum. 

[Future Indicative and Imperative of sum and of the 1st Conjugation]. 

21. Nuper, dum Marcus et Alexander mecum 
erant, patruo meo " Quantopere me delectabit" inquam 
"locum visitare ubi oppidum Romanum quondam 
stabat." Et Alexander " Monstra nobis," inquifi 
"amabo te, ruinas castelll Rutuplnl." Turn patruus 
meus " Longa est via," inquit " sed aliquand'6 mon-' 
strab5. Cras, si vobl.s gratum erit, ad locum ubj 
proelium erat BritannSrum cum RomanIs_ ambul- 



ORa maritiMA 39 

abimus. Ambulabitisne nobiscum, Marce et Alex- 
ander ? " "Ego vero " inquit Marcus " tecum libenter 
ambulabo " ; et Alexander " Mihi quoque pergratum 
erit, SI nobis sepulchra Britannorum et Rorftanorum 
monstrabis." Sed patruus meus " Festina lente " 
inquit ; " nullae sunt ibi reliquiae sepulchrorum, et 
viri docti de loco proelii disputant. Sed quota hora 
parati eritis ? " " Quinta hora " inquiunt. 

22. Postridie caelum serenum erat. Inter ienta- 
culum amita mea "Quota hora" inquit "in viam 
vos dabitis .'' et quota hora cenare poteritis .'' " Et 
patruus meus " Quinta hora Marcus' et Alexander 
Dubrls adventabunt ; intra duas horas ad locum 
proelii ambulare poterimus ; post una'm horam red- 
ambulabimus ; itaque hora decima vel undecima domi 
erimus, ut spero." Tum ego " Nonne ieiuni erimus," 
inquam "si nihil ante vesperum gustabimus .'' " 
" Prandium voblscum portate" inquit amita mea; 
" ego crustula et poma curabo." 



[Perfect Indicative of sum and of the rst Conjugalion.] 
23. Quinta hora appropinquabat, et amicos 
meos cupide exspectabam. Ad sonum tintinnabull 
ad fenestram properavl. Ecce, puerl ad ianuam 
aderant. Cum intraverunt, universi exclamavimus 
" Euge ! Opportune adventavistis ! " Tum Marcus 
" Num sero adventavimus ? " inquit; " hora fere tertia 
fuit cum in viam nos dedimus ; sed via longa est, 
et Alexander celeriter ambulare non potest." Sed 
Alexander " Non sum fatlgatus " inquit ; " sed quota 



40 



OKA MARITIMA 



liora est ? " Turn patruus mens " Nonduni quinta 
lidra est " iiiquit ; " )iaratTnc c^tio ad anibulanduni ? " 
Et ^Alexander " Nd. \-C-rr> ! " inquit. Tuni aniita nica 
ft Lydia " Bone ambulate ! " inquiiiiit, cl in viani 
nos dcdiiniis. 




C. lULU'S Carsar. 



24. Inter \-iain [atnius mens multa nobis dc bcllo 
Romanorum cum Britannls narra\'it. Prlmo sacculo 
ante Christum natum Gfuus Ifiliu^ in Ciallifi l^ell.abat, 
ct, ]"jostquam Ner\'irm ceteroujue |)n^)u!ui (iailiae 
Belyicae dC'bjella\"it, bellum ccjutra incola^ in ailae 
propinquae paravit. Itaque anno quintd et quinqiia- 
gesimo copias suas in Britanniam transportavit. 



ORA MARITIMA 



41, 



De loco unde navigavit et de loco quo navigia 
sua applicavit, virl docti diu disputaverunt. Sed 
inter Dubras et Rutupias est locus ad navigia 
applicanda idoneus. Dubras non poterat applicare ; 
nam scopuli ibi alti erant, ut nunc sunt, et in scopulis 
copiae armatae Britannorum stabant. Itaque ad 
alium locum navigavit, ubi nulll scopuli fuerunt. 
Sed Britanni quoque per oram maritimam ad 
locum properaverunt, et ad pugnara se paraverunt. 
Romanis necesse erat navigia sua magna ad ancoras 
deligare. Britannis vada nota fuerunt ; itaque in 
aquam equitaverunt et copiam. pugnae dederunt. 




Britanni Romanos in scopulis exspectant. 



42 



ORA MARITIMA 



[PlupciTect (i.e. Past Porfccl) Indicative of stun and of tfie 1st 
Conjugation.] 

25. Scd iam ad locum adventaveramus, et 
patruus meus " Spectate puerl " inquit ; " hic campus 
apertus est; scopull desunt, et locus idoneus est ad 
c5pias explicandas. Illlc fortasse, ubi scaphas pisca- 
torias spectatis, Gaius lulius navigia R5mana ad 
ancoras deligaverat. Hlc BritannI copias suas col- 
locaverant, et equos in aquam incitaverant. Nonne 
potestis t5tam pugnam animo spectare 1 Sed reliqua 
narrabo. Dum Roman! undJs sc dare dubitant, 
aquilifer ' Ad aquilam vos congregate,' inquit ' nisi 
ignavl estis. Ego certe officium meum praestabo.' 




AqL'ILIFEU SE UNDIS DAT. 



ORA MARITIMA 43 

Et cum aquila undis se dedit. lam universi RomanI 
ad aquiliferum se congregaverant, et cum Britannis 
in undls impigre pugnabant. Confusa et aspera fuit 
pugna. Primo laborabant Roman! ; sed tandem Brit- 
annos propulsaverunt et terram occupaverunt. Ante 
vesperum Britannl se fugae dederant. Numquam 
antea copiae Romanae in solo Britannico steterant. 
Audacia aquilifen laudanda erat." 



[Future Perfect Indicative oi sum and of the ist Conjugation.] 

26. Sed nos pueri prandium iam postulabamus : 
nam hora iam septima erat. Ouam bella crustula 
et poma tu, amita, dederas ! Quantopere nos bacae 
rubrae et nigrae delectaverunt ! Tum patruus meus 
" Cum nos recreaverimus," inquit " domum proper- 
abimus ; nam non ante undecimam horam advent- 
averimus ; interea amita tua, ml Antoni, nos exspect- 
averit. Nonne prandio satiatlestis.'"' Tum ego " Nulla 
in me mora fuerit." I£t Alexander " Ego iam paratus 
sum " inquit ; " sed quando tu, Marce, satiatus eris ? " 
Tum Marcus " leiunus ful" inquit ; " nam per quinque 
horas nihil gustaveram. Sed cum me altero porno 
recreavero, paratus ero. Tu, Alexander, inter viam 
crustulis operam dedisti ; nam puer parvus es." Nos 
cachinnamus, et mox in viam nos damus. 

VIII. Expeditio prima C. lulii Caesaris. 

[3rd Declension : nouns lil<e Caesar, iinperator, so!, cxpcdTtid.~\ 

27. Sed magnus erat calor soils et aeri.s, neque 
poteramus celeriter ambulare. Paulo post nebulae 
solem obscuraverunt, et imber magnus fuit. Mox 



44 ORA MARITIMA 

sol Oram maritimam splendore suo illustravit, et 
iteium in viam nos dedimus. Imber calorem aeris 
temperaverat ; et inter viam nos pueri patruum meum 
multa de C. lulio Caesare, imperatore magno Roman- 
orum, interrogavimus. " Cur expedltionem suam in 
Britanniam paravit ? " inquimus ; " cur copias suas in 
insulam nostram transportavit ? " Et patruus meus 
" C. lulius Caesar " inquit " proconsul erat Galliae, et 
per tres annos contra nationes bellicosas Gallorum 
et Belgarum bellaverat ; nam anno duodesexagesimo 
ante Christum natum Roman! Caesarem proconsulem 
creaverant. Roman! autem Britannos in numero 
Gallorum esse existimabant ; et revera nonnullae ex 
nationibus Britanniae meridianae a Belg!s oriundae 
erant. Atque Britann! Gall!s auxilia contra Romanos 
interdum subministraverant; sed Trinobantes auxil- 
ium Romanorum contra Cassivellaunum, regulum 
Cassorum, imploraverant." 

28. " Alia quoque causa bell! fuerat avaritia et 
exspectatio praedae. Cupid! erant Roman! insulam 
nostram ignptam et remotam vLsitandi et explorand! ; 
nam, ut Tacitus affirrnat, ignotum pro magnifico est. 
Itaque anno quinto et quinquagesimo ante Christum 
natum C. lulius Caesar exped!ti6nem suam pr!mam 
contra Britannos comparavit, et victoriam reportavit, 
ut narrav! ; nam post unum proelium Britann! vcniam 
a victoribus imploraverunt. Sed exped!tio non magna 
fuerat ; neque Rornan! ullam praedam ex Britannia 
reportaverant, nisi paucos servos et capt!v6s. Anno 
igitur proximo imperator Romanus secundam et 



ORA MARITIMA 45 

multo maiorem expedltionem in Britanniam paravit. 
Nam sescenta navigia oneraria in Gallia aedificavit, 
et quinque legiones^Romanas una cum magna multi- 
tudine au^iligrum Gallicorum in oram Belgicam con- 
greg^vit." 

IX. Pax violata. 

[3ru Declension continued : nouns like jjajs, aestas, miles. ] 

29. " Britannl pacem non violaverant, sed 1\6- 
mani pacis non cupidi erant Itaque aestate anni 
quart! et quinquagesiml ante Christum natum dux 
Romanus cum quinque legionibus militum Roman- 
orum et magno numero equitum et auxiliorum Gallic- 
orum iterum in Britanniam navigavit. Tempestas 
erat idonea, sed in media navigatione venfus non 
iajn flaisat ; itaque miHtibus necesse erat navigia 
remls inci^are. Impjgre remigaverunt, et postridie 
navig;ia ad oram Britannicam prospers applicaverunt. 
Labgr remigandl magnus erat, virtus militum magn- 
opere laudanda. BritannT Romanes in scopulis orae 
maritimae exspectabant ; sed postquam multitudinem 
navigiorum et militum equitumque spectaverunt, in 
fugam se dederunt. Caesar navigia sua inter Dubras 
et Rutupias applicavit, ut puto, non procul a loco quo 
priore anno applicaverat. Inde contra Britannos pro- 
peravit. Interea unam legionem cum trecentis equit- 
ibus ad castra in statione reservabat : nam perlcul- 
osum erat navigia ad ancoras deligata defensoribus 
nudar«." 



46 



ORA MARITIMA 




Castra Romana. 

X. Certamina varia. 

[3rd Declension conlinued : nouns like ^wmcji, tempiis.] 

30. " BritannI certamen vitaverunt, et in silvis 
se occultaverunt, ubi locus erat prope fliimen, egregie 
et natura et opera firmatus. Itaque ' oppidum ' Brit- 
annicum erat. De nomine fluminis nihil constat. 
Oppidum iam ante domestic! belli causa praepar- 
averant, et crebrls arboribus vallTsque firmaverant. 
Multa et varia certamina fuerunt : BritannI ex 
silvis cum equitibus essedlsque suis contra Romanes 
provolabant ; Romanis perlculosum erat intra munlt- 
iones Britannorum intrare. Sed post aliquantum 



ORA MARITIMA 



47 



temporis mllites septimae legionis aggere et testudine 
locum oppugnaverunt. Tandem Britannos ex silvls 
propulsaverunt. Pauca erant vulnera Romanorum : 
nam Roman! Britannos pondere armorum et scientia 
pugnandl multum superabant ; magnitudine et robore 
corporis BritannI Romanos superabant. Sed Roman! 
quoque homines robusto corpore erant." 




EssEDUM Britannicom. 

31. " Victoria Caesar! non multum profuit : nam 
Britann!s fugat!s instare non poterat, quia naturam loci 
ignorabat. Praeterea praefectus castrorum, nSmine 
Quintus Atrius, magnum incommodum nuntiaverat : 
tempestas navigia in l!tore afflictaverat. Tempus 
perlculosum erat ; nam Caesar! necesse erat a fliimine 



48 ORA MARITIMA 

ad iTtus maritimum properare, et legiones suas 
ab insectatione Britannorum revocare. Multa ex 
navigiis in vadis afiflictata erant ; cetera novis 
armls ornanda erant. Opus magnl laboris erat, et 
aliquantum temporis postulabat. Sed nautarum atque 
mllitum virtus magno opere laudanda erat. Non 
solum per diurna sed etiam per nocturna tempora 
laboraverunt. Interea Caesar nova navigia in Gallia 
aedificat : sine navigiis non poterat copias suas in' 
Galliam reportare ; uno tempore necesse erat et navigia 
reparare et contra Britannos bellare." 

XL Naves Romanae. 

f3rd Declension continued : nouns like raawu.] 

32. "Duo erant generanavium in classe Romana; 
unum erat genus navium longarum, alterum navium 
onerariarum. Naves longae ad pugnam aptae erant, 
naves onerariae ad onera atque multitudinem 
hominum et equorum transportanda. Tota classis . 
Caesaris octingentarum erat navium ; nam sescentas 
naves onerarias per hiemem in Gallia aedificaverat, 
ut narravi. Inter ceteras, ducentas numero, nonnullae 
naves longae erant. Sed navibus longis revera non 
opus erat Caesarl ; nam Britannis antiquTs nulla erat 
classis ; neque naves onerarias aedificabant." Turn 
ego " Britannia nondum domina undarum erat " 
inquam ; " sed quomodo frOmentum exportare 
poterant, si nullas naves aedificabant .-' " " Venet- 
orum naves " inquit patruus meus " frumentum 
Britannicum in Galliam portabant, et ex Gallia 



ORA MARITIMA 



49 



gemmas, vitrea, cetera in Britanniam. Nam Venetl, 
natio maiitima, in ora Gallica habitabant. Hostes 
fuerant Romanorum, et magnam classem conn- 
paraverant." 

33. Turn Marcus " Num nationes barbarae " 
inquit " naves longas ornare poterant ?" Et patruus 
meus " Formam navium GalHcarum Caesar in tertio 
libro Belli Gallic! commemorat. Puppes altae erant, 
ad magnitudinem tempestatum accommodatae ; 
carlnae planae. Veneti naves totas ex robore 
fabricabant ; ad ancoras catenis ferrels, non funibus, 
deligabant. Pelles pro veils erant, sive propter llnl 
inopiam, sive quia in pellibus plus firmitudinis quam 
in veils llneTs erat. Naves longae Romanorum non 
tarn altae erant quam Venetorum, sed rostrls ferreis 
et interdum turribus armatae erant ; itaque victoriam 
a Venetis reportaverant." Tum Alexander " Num 
naves Romanae laminls ferrels armatae erant ? " inquit. 
Sed Marcus : " Quid opus erat laminis ferrels, si 
tormenta hodierna antlquis deerant?" 




50 ORA MARITIMA 

XII. Gentium Britannicarum Societas. 

[3rd Declension continued : nouns lilce gens, pars]. 

34. Turn patruus meus reliqua de expedltione 
Caesaris narravit. " Dum milites nautaeque Roman! 
classem novis armis ornant, Caesar ad reliquas copias 
properat. Interea hostes summum imperium 
Cassivellauno mandaverant. Cassivellaunus non erat 
rex universarum gentium Britannicarum, sed dux 
vel princeps gentis Cassorum. Anno tamen quarto 
et quinquagesim5 ante Christum natum magna pars 
gentium Britanniae meridianae se sub Cassivellauno 
contra Romanes consociaverant. Flumen Tamesa 
fines CassivellaunI a finibus gentium maritimarum 
separabat ; ab oriente erant fines Trinobantium ; ab 
occidente Britanni mediterranei. Superiore tempore 
bella continua fuerant inter Cassivellaunum et reliquas 
gentes ; atque Trinobantes auxilium Romanorum 
contra Cassivellaunum imploraverant, quia regem 
suum trucidaverat. Numerus hostium magnus erat : 
nam, ut Caesar affirmat, inflnita multitude hominum 
erat in parte meridiana Britanniae." 

35. " Caesar formam et incolas Britanniae in 
capite duodecimo et tertio decim5 librl quinti com- 
memorat. Incolae partis interioris Celtae et barbari 
erant ; incolae maritimae partis ex Belgio praedae 
causa immigraverant, sTcut priore aetate trans flumen 
Rhenum in Belgium migraverant. Et nonnulla 
n5mina gentium maritimarum, unde nomina urbium 
hodiernarum derivata sunt, Belgica vel Gallica sunt. 



ORA MARITIMA 5 1 

Belgae autem a Germanis oriundi erant, ut Caesar in 
capite quarto librl secundi demonstrat. Itaque pars 
Britannorum antiquorum Germanica origine erant. 
Formam insulae esse triquetram declarat. Sed 
unum latus ad Galliam spectare existimat, alterum ad 
Hispaniam atque occidentem, tertium ad septan triSnes. 
Itaque de lateribus et angulis laterum errabat. 
Hiberniam ab occidente parte Britanniae esse recte 
iudicat, insulam Monam inter Britanniam et 
Hiberniam esse." 

XI I I. Maria Britannica. 

[3id Declension continued : nouns like mare]. 

36. " Lateris prlmi longitudinem circiter quin- 
genta milia esse iudicat, secundi septingenta, tertil 
octingenta. Itaque de magnitudine insulae non 
multum errabat. Flumen Tamesam a marl circiter 
octoginta mIlia distare iudicat." Hlc nos puerl 
" Errabat igitur" inquimus ; " nam inter Londinium et 
mare non sunt octoginta milia." Sed patruus meus 
"Recte iudicabat" inquit; "nam pars maris ubi Caesaris 
castra erant circiter octoginta milia Romana a 
Londinio distat. Tria maria insulam nostram 
circumdant ; inter Britanniam et Galliam est mare 
Britannicum vel fretum Gallicum ; ab occidente mare 
Hibernicum ; ab oriente mare Germanicum. Nomina 
marium temporibus antlquis non usitata erant ; sed 
iam Graecl Britanniam esse insulam iudicabant." 

XIV. Britannia pacata. 

[Recapitulation of nouns of the 3rd Declension.] 

37. " Inter Tamesam et mare Britannicum prlima 



52 



ORA MARITIMA 



concursio erat Romanorum cum copils Cassivellaunl. 
BritannT duas cohortes Romanas in itinere fortiter im- 
pugnaverunt. Ex silvissuls provolaverunt ; Romanos 
in fugam dederunt ; multos Romanorum trucid- 
averunt. Tum suos a pugna revocaverunt. Novum 
genus pugnae Romanos perturbaverat. Nam BritannTs 
non mos erat iusto proelio pugnare ; sed equitibus 
essedlsque suis per omnes partes equitabant, et 
ordiiies hostium perturbabant ; tum consulto copias 
suas revocabant. Essedarii interdum pedibus pugna- 
bant. Ita mobilitatem equitum, stabiiitatem peditum 
in proelils praestabant. Pedites Roman! propter 
pondus armorum non aptl eraiit ad huiusmodi hostem. 




IJUITANNI CUM ROMANIS IX ITINKRE PUGNANT. 



ORA MARITIMA 53 

Et equitibus Romanis periculosum erat st3 longo 
intervallo a peditibus separare : neque- pedibus 
pugnare poterant." 

38. " Itaque Roman! ordines suos contra equites 
Britannonim in primo certamine non servaverant. 

Sed postrldie Roman! victoriam reportaverunt. 
Britann! in collibus prccul a castris R6man!s stabant. 
Caesar magnum numerum cohortium et universos 
equites legato suo Trebonio mandaverat. Hostes 
subito provolaverunt, et ordines Romanes impugn- 
averunt. Sed Roman! superiores fuerunt. Copias 
Britannicas propulsaverunt, et in fugam dederunt. 
Magnum numerum hostium trucldaverunt. Tum dux 
continuis itineribus ad flumen Tamesam et in fines 
Cassivellaun! properavit. Cassivellaunus autem cum 
quattuor milibus essedariorum itinera Romanorum 
servabat, et paulum de via decl!nabat seque in ailv!s 
occultabat. Interdum ex silvis provolabat et cum 
militibus R5man!s pugnabat ; Roman! autem agros 
Britannorum vastabant." 

39. " In parte fluminis Tamesae ubi fines Cassi- 
vellaun! erant unum tantum vadum erat. Quo cum 
Caesar adventayt, copias hostium ad alteram ripam 
fluminis collocatas spectavit. Rlpa autem sudibus 
acutis firmata erat; et Britann! multas sudes sub aqua 
quoque occultaverant. Sed Caesar hostibus instare 
non dubitavit. Aqua fluminis profunda erat, et mllites 
capite solum ex aqua exstabant ; sed Roman! se aquae 



54 



ORA MARITIMA 



fortiter mandaverunt, et Britannos in fugam dederunt. 
' Oppidum ' CassivellaunI non longe aberat, inter silvas 
paludesque situm, quo Britanni magnum numerum 
hominum, equorum, ovium, boum, congregaverant. 
Locum egregie et natura et opere firmatum Caesar 
ex duabus partibus oppugnare properavit : oppidum 
expugnavit et defensores fugavit." 




Britanni Castka Romana Oppugnant. 



40. " Sed in Cantio, ubi quattuor reges Britannls 
praeerant, nondum finis erat pugnandl. Britanni 
castra Romana ad mare sita fortiter oppugnant ; sed 
frustra. RomanI victores. Interea multae ex clvitat- 
ibus Britannicis pacem orant Trinobantibus Caesar 



ORA MARITIMA 



SS 



novum regem dat, et pacem confirmat. Ltaque propter 
'tot clades, propter fines suos bello vastatos, maxime 
autem propter defectionem tot civitatum, Cassivel- 
launus de condicionibus pacis deliberat. "Caesar pacem 
dat; Cassivellaunum vetat Trinobantes bello vex are, 
et tributum Britannis imperat. Turn copias suas cum 
magno numero obsidum et captTvorum in Galliam 
reportat. BritannI fortiter sed frustra pro arls et 
focls suis pugnaverant." 




Tropabum Britannicum. 



56 ORA MARITIMA 

XV. Robur et aes triplex. 

[Adjectives of the 3rcl Declension.] 

41. Turn Marcus "ogentem fortem et admiiabil- 
em Britannorum !" inquit. " Nam insigne erat facinus 
quod contra Roinaaos, victores orbis terrarum, tarn 
fortiter et nonnumquam prospers pugnaverunt. Non 
mirum est, si RomanT vict5riam reportaverunt." Nos 
sententiam Marci comprobavimus. Sed iam nona hora 
erat, cum Alexander, digits ad orientem monstrans, 
" Nonne naves procul a lltore spectatis ? " inquit. Et 
patruus meus " Ita est " inquit ; " nam illlc est static 
tuta navibus. Sed illae naves, ut puto, naves longae 
sunt ex classe Britannica ; nam pars classis nostrae 




Navis Longa Britannica. 



ORA MARITIMA . 57 

nunc in freto Gallico est. Turn ego "euge, optime!" 
inquam ; " navem longam adhuc non spectavi. Sed 
non tam grandes sunt quam putavl." "Pergrandes 
sunt,'' inquit patruus meus " sed procul a litore sunt ; 
omnes laminis ferreis, nonnullae arietibus vel turribus 
armatae sunt." 

42. Turn nautam veteranum de nominibus navi- 
um longarum interrogavimus. In classe Britannica 
militaverat, sed turn militia vacabat, et custos erat orae 
maritimae. Nomina navium, ut affirmabat, erant 
Gra?tdts, Regdlis, Magnifica, Tonans, Arrogans, Ferox ; 
omnibus tegimen erat laminis ferreis fabricatum. In 
Grajidi praefectus classis navigabat. Omnes ad 
ancoram deligatae erant. Tum Alexander " Cur non " 
inquit " ad naves in scapha navigamus ? " Mihi et 
Marco propositum pergratum erat ; et nauta ad 
navigandum paratus erat. Itaque patruus meus " Sero 
domum adventabimus " inquit; "sed si vos pueri 
cupidi estis navem longam spectandl, ego non deneg- 
abo." Tum nauta " Exspectate" inquit " dum omnia 
paro" ; et vela remosque in scapham portavit. Quam 
dulce erat in marl tranquillo navigare! Ventus lenis 
flabat, et brevi tempore ad Regdlem appropinquavimus. 
Tum classiaril nobis navem ingentem monstraverunt 
cum machinis, tormentis, rostiis, ceteris. 

43. Hora iam decima erat cum a Regdli nos in 
scapham dedimus. Tum ad lltus remigare necesse 
erat ; nam ventus adversus erat. Ego et Marcus una 
cum patruo meo et nauta veterano remis laboravimus. 



58 , ORA MARITIMA 

Sed non ante undecimam horam in lltore stetimus. 
Dum domum properamus, imber fuit, et necesse erat 
in tabcrna aliquantum temporis exspectare : intrav- 
imus et nos recreavimus ; nam fatigati eramus. Sed 
' post tenebras lux.' Cum domum adventavimus, amita 
mea et Lydia " Ubi tam diu fuistis ? " inquiunt ; " nos 
anxiae fuimuS ; sed cena iam parata est." Tum nos 
" Multa spectavimus " inquimus ; " ambulatio longa 
sed pergrata et utilis fuit." Post cenam Marcus et 
Alexander Dabras in vehiculo properaverunt. Ego 
per noctem de Britannis antlquis et de classe Britan- 
nicahodierna somniavl. Ante oculos erant viri fortes 
membris robustis, flavis capiUls, oculis caerulels cum 
Romanis terra marlque pugnantes. 



DuLCE Domum. 



Deus Salvam Fac Reginam, 
Matrem Patriae. 



PREPARATIONS 

Note to the Teacher on the Pronunciation of Words. If the 
last syllable but one of a word of more than two syllables is long;, it is also 
accented : it-short, the accent is thrown back on to the last syllable but two. 
But words of only two syllables are always accented on the first of the two. 

Syllables closed by two or more consonants are mostly long, as in viLLa, 
luSCinia, iNTeRDiim, paRTem, uMBRa, feneSTRa ; so too are syUibles 
containing a double vowel, as in uAUtAE. But many syllables ending in a 
single consonant and containing a single vowel are also long, because the vowel 
is itself a long vowel : these vowels are marked in the text and vocabularies 
of this book. Thus beata and antiqua have the middle syllable long, and are 
therefore marked beata, antiqua : and it is because the middle syllable in each 
of these words has a long vowel in it that it is accented [beata, antiqua). 
Vowels which do not bear any mark may be regarded as short, as in domina, 
amita, casa, quoque, mea, tua (accented domina, dinita, cdsa, qii6qice, mia, 
tua). 

In the Drill Exercises and Appendices (pp. 101-144) the quantities of the 
long vowels- are not marked, except for some special reason (e.g. in order to 
distinguish the ablative singular of the ist declension from the nominative 
singular). These pages will provide an opportunity of testing how far the ear 
of the pupil has been trained by the study of the text. 



6o 



PREPARATIONS 



I. The Sea Coast. 

[Englisli wurds connected with the Latin by origin, but not intended as 
translations of them, are given in square brackets and Roman type.] 



quam bella 


}ww beautiful 


villae 


of the country-house 


est 


is 


area 


an open space [area] 


ora maritima 


the sea-shore 


in area 


in the open space 


non procul 


not far 


castanea 


a chestnut-tree 


ab ora marit 




ubi 


where 


ima 


from tJu sea-shore 


luscinia 


a nightingale 


villa 


a coujttry-house 


interdum 


sometimes 




[villa] 


cantat 


sings 


in villa 


i?i the country-house 


sub umbra 


under the shade 


amita mea 


my aunt 




(umbra, shade ; 


habitat 


dwells, lives 




cf. 'umbrella') 


et 


and 


castaneae 


of the chestnut-tret 


ego habito 


I dwell, T am 


ancilla 


a maidservant 




staying 


cenam parat Jirepares supper 


cum amita mea with 7ny aunt 


amo Oram 


I love tlie shore 


nunc 


now 


amo villam / love the pretty 


ante ianuara 


before the door 


bellam 


country-house 



Compare the different forms of the same word (Singular 
Number) in the following sentences : 

Villa bella est. There is a pretty country-house, or The country- 
house is pretty. 

Villam bellam amo. I love the pretty country-house. 

lanua villae bellae est aperta. The door 'of the pretty country- 
house is open. 

In villa bella habito. / am staying in the pretty country house. 

Note, ego habito, 1 am staying (where the word /has some 
stress) ; amo, / love (where the word / has no stress.) 



PREPARATIONS 



6i 



§2. 








feriae 


holidays 


incolae 


the inhabitants 


sunt 


are or there 


nautae 


sailors 




are 


magna est 


great is (or is 


feriae nunc sunt 


it is now the 




great) 




holidays 


audacia 


the courage 


inter ferias 


during tlie 


nautarum 


of sailors 




holidays 


procellas formi- 




in villa maritima 


in the country- 


dant 


they fear 




house by 




storms 




the sea 


nautas amo 


T like sailors 


6 beatas ferias ! 


oh, the liappy 


ut 


as 




holidays 1 








nautae 


sailors 


in arena 


on the sand 










me amant 


like me 


orae marilimae 


of the sea coast 






ancorae 


anchors 


cum nautis 


with the sailors 


et 
catenae 


and 
chains 


in scaphis 
navigd 


in boats 

[skiffs] 
/ sail [navi- 


nam 


for 




gate] 



Compare the forms of the Plural ' nautae,' sailors, in the above 
sentences : nautae me amant, sailors like me ; nautas amo, I like 
sailors ; audacia nautarum, the courage of sailors ; cum nautis, 
with sailors. Note that the ending -ae, like the English -s, has 
two different meanings: nautae = (i) sailor's, (2) sailors. 

Compare the different forms of the same word (Plural Num- 
ber) in the following sentences : 

Villae bellae sunt. There are pretty country-houses, or Thr 
country-houses are pretty. 

Villas bellas amo. I love pretty country-houses. 

lanuae villarum bellarum sunt apertae. The doors of the pretty 

country-houses are open. 
In villis bellls habitant. They dwell in pretty country-houses. 



62 



PREPARATIONS 



§3- 

ex fenestris out of {or from) 

the windows 
undas spectas thou seest (you 
see) the waves 
caeruleas blue 

quam magnae sunt how big they 
are (i.e. the 
waves, und- 
ae) 
transparent 

[lucid] 
after supper 
J see the moon 
the stars 
from my win- 
dow 
near the coun- 
try-house 
a wood 
often 
I walk 
how much 



per-lucidae 

post cenam 

lunam specto 

Stellas 

ex fenestra mea 

prope villam 

silva 
saepe 



nos delectat 
copiam 

plantarum 
herbarum 

bacarum 
non solum 
sed etiam 
agricolae 
circum 
habitant 
casae 

agricolarum 
parvae 
casas albas 
habitant 

casas visitat 



delights us 

oh the abund- 
ance 

of plants 

of grasses, of 
herbs 

of berries 

notonly [solely] 

but also 

farmers 

around 

dwell 

the cottages 

of the farmers 

small 

inhabit white 

cottages 
visits the 

cottages 



ambulo 
quantopere 

Compare the Singular and Plural forms of the word ' amita ' 
in the following sentences : 

Amita mea casas visitat. My aunt visits cottages. 

Amitae meae casas visitant. My aunts visit cottages. 
Amitam meam amo. I love my aunt. 

Amitas meas amo. I love my aunts. 
Amitae meae villa est bella. My aunfs country-house is pretty. 

Amitarum mearum villae sunt bellae. My aunts' 
country-houses are pretty. 
Cum amita mea ambulo. T walk with my aunt. 

Cum amitis meis arabulo. T walk with my aunts. 



PREPARATIONS 



63 



Notice that the forms in -am (Singular) and -as (Plural) occur 

(i) after certain Prepositions : 

ante ianuara, before the door ; post cenam, after supper ; 
prope villam, near the house ; inter ferias, during the holidays. 

(2) without any Preposition, to complete the sense with certain 
Verbs. The form in -am or -as is then called the Object of the 
Verb. In the following sentences it will be seen that the forms 
in -am and -as differ in meaning from those in -a and -ae just 
as me differs from / (or ' him^ ' them,' ' whom,' from ' he,' 
' they,' ' who ') in English : — 



I 


love 




sailors. 


Ego 


amo 


nautas. 


Sai/ors 


love 


me. 




Nautae 


amant 


me. 




The maid-servant prepares 


supper. 


Ancilla 


parat 


cenam. 


Sailors 


inhabit 


white cottages. 


Nautae 


habitant 


casas albas. 


§4. 








regina mea 


my queen 


undarum 




of the waves 


magna 


great 


triumphs 




I triumph, I 


gloria 


the glory 






exult 


Victoriae Reglnae of Queen Vic- 


te amo 




I love thee 




toria (or Queen 


Britannia 




Britain 




Victoria's) 


vos 




you 


in insulis Brit- 




insulae Britann- 




annicls 


in the British 


icae 




British isles 




islands 


non est 




is not 


coloniae Britann 


- 


patria 




native-land 


icae 


British colonies 


ex Africa 






domina 


mistress 


Merldiana 


from South 




[dame] 






Africa 


multarum terrarum of many lands 


sum 




I am 



Note that the forms in -a (Singular) and -ae (Plural) may 
be used in speaking to persons or things ; in such cases we may 
translate by using the word 'o' in English, but generally it is 
better to leave out this word : te, Britannia, amo, / love thee, 
Britain .- vos, insulae Biitannicae, amo, I love you, British isles. 



64 


PREPARATIONS 




§5. 








quoque 


ioo, also 


operani das 


givest (give) 


consobrina 


cousin 




attention 


apud amitam 






{ = study) 


meam 


at the house of 


ego operam do 


I give atten- 




my aunt 




tion 


columbas curat 


keeps doves 


Unguis antiquis 


to the ancient 


cura 


the care 




languages 


columbarum 


of doves 


Romae 


of Rome 


Ly'Jiae 


to Lydia 


Graeciae 


of Greece 


laetitiam dat 


gives delight 


cum Lydia 


see § I : cum 


tu, Lydia 


thou {you), 
Lydia 


ad silvam 


amita mea 
to the wood 


cum 


when 


vel 


or 


es 


thou art, 


navigamus 


ive sail 




you are 


undae delectant 


the waves de- 


apud magistram 






light 


tuam 


at the, Iwuse of 


vos, flliae, amatisjvfj^, o daugh- 




thy (your) 




ters, love 




schoolmistress 


vos amat 


loves you 


linguae Franco- 
gallicae 


to the French 


ubi ... ibi 


where . . there 


language 


inopia 


want, poverty 


Anglicae 


to the English 


levat 


relieves 



Compare carefully : 

Lydiae laetitiam da:t, gives pleasure tO Lydia. 

ad silvam ambulo, / walk to the wood. 

The forms in -ae (Singular) and -is (Plural) meaning 'to' are 
often found with verbs of ' giving ' ; hence they are called the 
' Dative Case' (Case of Giving). But they are not used with verbs 
of ^ going'' ; with these verbs 'to' is expressed by the Preposition 
' ad ' followed by a form in -am (Singular) or -as (Plural). 



PREPARATIONS 



65 



1st Case. 
2nd Case. 
3rd Case. 
4th Case. 
5th Case. 
6th Case. 



First Declension. 

Lydia Lydia 

Lydia o Lydia- • 

Lydiam Lydia 

Lydiae Lydia' s, of Lydia 

Lydiae to Lydia 
cum Lydia with Lydia 



Name of Case. 
Nominative. 
Vocative. 
Accusative. 
Genitive. 
Dative. 
Ablative. 



SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

6 


villa bella 
villa bella 
villam bellam 
villae bellae 
villae bellae (with a verb 
of 'giving') 
in viUa bella 


villae beUae 
villae bellae 
villas bellSs 
villamm bellarum 
villis bellis (with a verb of 
'giving') 
in villis bellis 



■ The Preposition which is used with the Ablative Case 
must be varied to suit the sense of the noun which is being 
declined : e.g. 'cum Lydia,' but 'in villa' or 'ex villa' or 'a villa.' 



Present Tense of 'sum' and 1st Conjugation. 


1st Person 
2nd Person 
3rd Person 


SINGULAR. 
sum, I am 

63, thou art (you are) 
est, he (she, it) is 


PLURAL. 
sumus, we are 
estis, you are 
sunt, they are 


1st Person 
2nd Person 
3rd Person 


spectS, /see 

spectas, thou reest (you see) 

spectat, he (she, it) sees 


spectamns, we see 
spectatia, you see 
spectant, they see 



The verb 'do,' I give, has a short a in the ist and 2nd person 
plural : damus, datis. 



66 



PREPARATIONS 



11. My Uncle. 

§ 6. iS" In this and the following Preparations the nouns of the 1st Decl. 
will be given in the Norn. Sing., except when a whole phrase is quoted. 



patruus meus 


my uncle 


prope hortura 


near the gar- 


quondam 




once, formerly 




den 


praefectus 




an officer 


unde 


wlience, from 


erat 




ivas 




which 


militia* vacat 


he is free (i.e. 


aqua 


water 




he has 


retired) from 


portamus 


we fetch, we 




military service 




carry 


agello suo 




to his farm 


hortum irrigamus we water 


agellus 




the farm or 
estate 




[irrigate] the 
garden 


patrui mei 




of my uncle 


in horto 


in the garden 


magnus 




large 


nmncrus 


number 


circum villam 


around the 


ros.i 


a rose 






villa 


viola 


a violet 


hortus 




a garden 


tibi 


to thee, to you 


murus 




a ivall 


mi patrue 


my uncle 


horti 




of the garden 


cum patruo meo with my uncle 


altus 




high 


ambulas 


thou walkest, 


rivus 




a stream 
[river] 




you walk 


* Note the Ablative without a P 


-eposition, here 


meaning ' from.' 





Second Declension 


. 




Nouns and Adjectives in -us. 




SINGULAR NUMBER. 


' 


1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

6 


hortus bellua, a pretty garden 
horte belle, o pretty garden 
hortum helium, a pretty garden 
horti belli, of a pretty garden 
horto beUo, to a pretty garden (with a 
verb of 'giving ') 
in horto bell5, in a pretty garden 





PREPARATIONS 



(>! 



§7. 



angulus 


angle, corner 


mergis 


to sea-gulls 


ulmi 


elms 


cibum dat 


gives fQod 


in ulmis 


in the elms 


agellus suus 


his estate 


corvi 


crows 


equi 


horses 


nidificant 


make nests 


vacca 


cow 


corvos specto 


I watch the 


porci 


pigs [pork; 




crows 


galli gallinae- 


que cocks and hens 


libenier 


gladly 


gallos curat 


minds t/ie cocks 


circum nidos suos round their 


vicus 


a village 




nests 


rustic! 


the country- 


volitant 


they fly 




folk, the 


corvorum 


of crows 




rustics 


multi mergi 


many sea-gulls 


nonnulll ex 




super oceanum 


over the ocean 


rusticis 


some of {out of) 


mergi 


sea-gulls 




the rustics 


volitatis 


you fly 


cum equls 


with {together 


praeda 


prey 




with)' the 


captatis 


you catch 




horses. 


oceanus 


the ocean 







Note in the above: — 1. corvl nidificant, crows make nests. 
2. vos, corvi, you, o crows. 3. corvos specto, / watch crows, 
4. namerus corvorum, a number of crows. 5. corvis dat, gives 
to crows. 6. cum corvis, with crows. 



SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

6 


hortus bellus 
horte belle 
hortum bellum 
horti belli 

horto bello (with a verb 
of 'giving') 
in horto bello 


horti belli 
horti belli 
hortoa bellos 
hortornm bellorum 
horlia bellis (with a verb of 
' giving ') 
in hortis bellis 



68 



PREPARATIONS 



§ 8. IS" In this and the following Preparations the nouns of the 2ncl Decl. 
-us will be given in the Norn. Sing., except when a whole phrase is quoted. 



scopulus albus 

ab-est 

noctu 

pharus 
velut 

Stella clara 
in oceano 
illustrat 



a white cliff 

is distant 

by night, in the 

night-time 
light-house 
as, even as 
a bright star 
on the ocean 
lights up 

[illustrates] 



spectare 
(undae) tran- 

quillae 
lavaris 
delectatis 
(undae) tuibu- 

lentae 

spumatis 
murniuratis 



to see 

calm, tranquil 

(waves) 
you wash [lave] 
you delight 

rough, turbu- 
lent {waves) 
you foam 
you murmur 



III. Ancient Monuments. 

§ 9- ^^ In this and the following Preparations the verbs of the 1st 
Conjugation, Present Ten=e, will be gi\'en in the ist Person Sing., except 
where a whole phrase is quoted. 

in Cantio in Kent 

inter between 

Dubrae Dover 

Rutupiae Richborough 

situs situated 

oppida antlqua ancient towns 
multa monumenta many monu- 
ments 

vestiges, traces 

a Roman 
reliquiae relics 

oppidorum of towns 

ampliitliealrorum of amphi- 
theatres 



vestigia 
Romanus 



hodie 

ex-slo 
via 

Londinium 
solum 



to-day, at the 
present day 
I exist, remain 
a road 
London 
soil 



multos r.unimos many coins 
(numnios) aureos^o/iiff^ (coins) 
(nummos) argen- (coins) made of 

teos silver 

(nummos) aeneos made of copper 



et . . 

Britannus 

occulto 

causa 

lucrl 

aro 

ftindaraenta 

aedificiorum 



et 



and 



excavo 

magno pretio* 
venum-do 
patruo meo est 



both 

a Briton 
I hide 

a cause, source 
of gain [lucre] 
I plough 
the foundations 
of buildings 
[edifices] 
I excavate 
at a great price 
I offer for sale 
my uncle has; 
literally to my uncle 
there is 



*Note the Ablative without a Preposition, here meaning 'at,' 
(an expression of ' price ' or ' value ')• 



PREPARATIONS 



69 



Note the words Dubrae, Dover ; Rutupiae, Richborough ; 
reliquiae, relics. These words are Plural in form and have no 
Singular. The first two are Singular in meaning, like the English 
' Athene ' (Lalin ' Axhenae ') ; the third is Plural in meaning. 

Second Declension — continued. 
Nouns and Adjectives in -um. 



SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1, 2, 3 
4 
5 

6 


oppidum, a town, to-Mit 
oppidi, of a to-jjn 
oppide, to a town (with a 
verb of ' giving ') 
in oppido, iti a toivn 


oppida, towns, towns 
oppidorum, of towns 
oppidis, to towns (with a 
verb of 'giving') 
in oppidis, in tozvns 



Similarly with an adjective : oppidum antiquum, an ancient town. 



§ 10. SS' In this and the following Preparations the nouns of the 2nd 
Declension in -um will be given in the Nom. Sing., except when a whole 
phrase is quoted. 



commentarii 

de vita mea 
scriptito 



super oppidum 
castellum 
specula 
muri lati 



notes, com- 
mentaries 
about my life 
I write, jot 
down 
[scribble] 
above the town 
fort [castle] 
a watch-tower 
broad walls 



aedificium con- a consecrated' 

secratiim building 

iam already 

secundo saeculo* in t/ie second 
century 



post Christum after the birth 
natum of Christ {\'\t. 

after Christ 
born) 
basilica Christ- a Christian 
iana basilica (or 

churcK) 

*Note the Ablative without a Preposition, here meaning 'in' 
(an expression of ' time when 'V 



70 



PREPARATIONS 



§11. 








promunturium 


a promontory, 


navigium Ger- 


a German 




headland 


man icuni 


vessel 


sto 


I stand 


navigium Bdgi- 


a Belgian 


post castellum 


behind the 


cum 


vessel 




castle 


nonnulla (r.avi- 


some (vessels) 


clivus gramineus 


a grassy hill 


gia) 






or doivn 


ex navigiis 


of the vessels 


fretum Gallicum 


the English 


sunt noniinata 


are named 




(lit. Gallic) 


" castelb " i.e 


. Castle Linen 




Channel 


littera C 


the letter C 


oculus 


an eye 


in signo 


on the flag 


velum album 


a zvhite sail 


in (with Ace.) 


to 




IV. Boys* Amusements. 




§12. 








delectamentum 


amusement 


condiscipulus 


schoolfellow 




[delight] 


liber scholrs* 


free from 


puerorum 


of boys 




lessons 


amicus 


friend 


amicitia 


friendship 


duo puerl 


two boys 


una 


together 


Marcus 


Mark 


unda spumifera 


a foamy wave 


puer 


a boy 


nato 


I swim, batht 


quattuor-decim 


four-teen 


nimis 


too 


annus 


year 


(undae) asperae 


rough {waves ^ 


quattuordecim 




nos pueros 


us boys 


annorum 


of fourteen 


ludus 


game 


years, i.e. fourken 


pila 


ball [pill] 


years old 


ut 


how 


mihi 


to me 


iuvat 


it delights 


praecipuus 


chief especial, 


aTedificare 


to build 




particular 


contra undas 


against the 


Caledonia 


Scotland 




waves 


(puerl) oriundl 


{boys) sprung 







nobis puerls sunt to us boys there 
are { = we boys have ; 
cf. patruo meo est, §9) 
♦ Note the Ablative without 
' from ' ; cf. militia vacat. S 6 



For the forms in -are 
§ 8 : spectare, to see. 



see 



a Preposition, here meaning 





PREPARATIONS 


;i 


§13- 






plenae gaudiorum full of joys 


plerumque 


mostly, gener- 


a mane 


from morn 




ally 


usque ad vesperum right ontill eve 


remigo 


I row 




[vespers] 


do 


T set (cf. §5, 


nonnumquam 


sometimes (lit. 




give) 




not never) 


ventus asper 


a rough wind 


Petrus 


Peter 


guberao 


I steer [govern] 


adulescentulus 


a young man 


ministro 


/ attend 


vlginti • 


twenty 




[minister] 


reuius * 


oar 


laudo 


I praise 


(scapha) apta 


{a boat) fitted, 
adapted 






* Note the Dative meaning ' for ' (remis, for oars). 



Second Declension — continued. 

Nouns and Adjectives like 'puer' 

(i.e., without the ending -us or -um in the Nom. Sing.) 



SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


t 

2 
3 
4 
5 
6 


puer, a boy 
puer, boy 
puerum, a boy 
pueri, a boy's 
puero, to a boy 
cum puero, with a boy 


pneil, hoys 
pueri, boys 
pueros, boys 
puerorum, boy/ 
puetis, to boys 
cum pueria, with boys 



There are not many nouns declined like 'puer.' Vesper, 
evening or evening star, is like it for the most part, but has no 
Plural. There are, however, a few adjectives (not many) declined 
like 'puer' in both Singular and Plural, for instance : ]Sotx free; 
miser, unhappy, miserable; asper, rough; spumifer, 7^a«i_y, foam- 
bearing and other words compounded of fer, bearing). 



72 



PREPARATIONS 



§ 14. «ar In this and the following Preparations the nouns of the 2nd 
Declension like pusr will be given in the Norn. Sing., except when a whole 
phrase is quoted. 



locus place 

fabula plcy\ drama, 

[fable] 
conimemoratus mentioned 

[commemorated] 
Lair Lear 

regulus ruler, petty 

king 
fortuna misera unhappy fate 

[miserable fortune] 
deploro / deplore, 

lament 
stultitia folly 

culpo I blame 

animus ingratus ingratitude 

(lit. an ungrateful 

mind) 
accQso / accuse 

fortuna aspera hhrshfate 
filiae impiae unnatural 

[impious] daughters 



constantia 
ex poeta 
nominatus 



vir generosus 

amicus fidus 

de scopulo 

se praecipitare 

paro 

filius suus 
virum servat 

periculum 



constancy 
named after 
(from) the 
poet; 
e. Shakspere's clijff 
a man of noble 
birth, a nol>le?nan 
[generous] 
a faithful 

friend 
do7vnfrom the 

cliff 
to hurl hunselj 
[precipitate] 
I prepare 
his own son 
saves the man 

[preserves] 
peril, danger 



Vir. 



SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 


vir, a man 
vir, man 
virum, a vian 
virl, a man^s 
viro, to a man 
cum viro, with a man 


viri, meti 
viri, men 
viros, men 
virorum, men^s 
viria, to men 
cum viria, ivith men 



There is no other word in Latin exactly like 'vir'; but 'Leir' 
is declined in the same way in some Latin Histories of the 
Britons. 



PREPARATIONS 



73 



«I5- 

magister nostei 



V. Our Schoolmaster. 



our school- 
master, teacher 
a learned man 
skilled in (lit. 
of) games 
carus (with Dat.) dear {to) 



vir doctus 
peritus ludorum 



right-hand 

our school- 
master's 

{a) strong 
{right hand) 

lazy boys 

neither . . nor 



dextra 
magistri nostri 

(dextra) valida 

pueiT pigri 

nee . . . nee 

magistrum amant love tJie master 

SabidI Sabidius 

(see note below) 
possum I can, I am 

able 
dicere (3rd Conj.) {to) say 
quare why 

hoc tantum this only 

quia because 

libros amant they love hooks 

(libros) Craecos Greek {books) 
(libros) Latinos Latin {books) 
discipulus /z^/zV [disciple] 

scholae nostrae of our school 
atque and also 

scientiae mathe- 

maticae mathematical 

sciences 



magistro noslro 
librorum pulchr- 

orum 
schola nostra 
(schola) clara 

librls 

in vico nostro 

ludus litterarius 



to our master 

of fine books 
our scfiool 
{a) famous 

{school) 
to books 
in our village 



an elementary 
school (litterarius = where 
pupils are tauglit ' lit- 
terae,'cf. §11). 'Schola' 
means a more advanced 
kind of school 
creber puerls* crowded {filled) 
et puellis with boys and 

girls 
(creber) llberls with children 
(Plural of the adjective 
liber, free : literally free 
ones, i.e. children of 
free-born parents) 
cum Alexandre withAlexander 
(cum) amicls 

mels {ivith) my 

friends 
ad Ventam Belg- at (or near) 
arum Winchester 

(Venta of the Belgae 
iu Hampshire) 



The lines quoted above (from the poet Martial, about a Roman 
called Sabidius) are the original of the following English verses : 

I do not like you, Dr. Fell ; 

The reason why I cannot tell. 

But this one thing I know full well, 

I do not like you, Dr. Fell. 
*Note the Ablative without a Preposition, here meaning ' with.' 



74 PREPARATIONS 

Second DeGlension— continued. 

Nouns and Adjectives like 'magister.* 



SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1 

2 
3 
4 
5 
6 


magister, a mas/rr 
magister, o master 
magistrum, a master 
magiBtrJ, a master's 
magistrS, to a master 
cum magistro, with a master 


magistri, masters 
magistri, o masters 
magiBtros, masters 
magistrSrum, masters' 
magistrls, to masters 
cum magistris, with masters 



Most nouns and adjectives of the 2nd Declension in er are 
declined like 'magister': liber, book; Alexander, Alexander; 
noster, our ; piger, lazy ; creber, crowded; and many others. 

These words differ from ' puer ' only in dropping the e in all the 
Cases except the Nominative and the Vocative. 



Uses of the Forms of Adjectives. 

It will have been seen that the form of the adjective depends 
on the form of the noun to which it belongs. Thus we have had: 

magnz^j' numerwj-, § 7 magn^z audacia, § 2 magn?/;« castellz.!»2, §10 

scopulw alb?«, §8 casa albi7, §3 ye\uvi dXbum, § 11 

numm«j- antTquz/.f, §9 specula antiqua, §10 oppidum antTquK/«, §9 

patru;^.r mtus, §6 _ amita mea, § i 

vir doct«j', §15 

liber Latin«.f, § 15 

vent«5 asper, § 13 fortuna aspera, § 14 

It is clear, then, that there are many more forms of the 



PREPARATIONS 



75 



adjective than of the noun; for each of the above adjectives has 
three forms Qi the Nominative Case r ■ - 



(omitted in some ad- 
jectives hke 'asper') 



Similarly we may arrange nouns in three classes : 



Nouns which take 


Nouns which take 


Nouns which take 


adjectives in ^(or 


adjectives in -a 


adjectives in -um 


those like 


asper ') 






numerus 




audacia 


castellum 


nummus 




casa 


valum 


patruus 




specula 


oppidum 


vir* 




amita 


etc. 


liber* 




fortuna 




etc. 




etc. 





*Note that in these cases the ending of the noun is not the same as that oi 
the adjective which goes with it. 

To these three classes of nouns it is convenient to give names, 
nouns of the first class are called masculine, those of the second 
class are caWsd feminine, those of the third class are called neuter. 
And the forms of the adjective taken by the different classes of 
nouns are called by the same names. 

In order to know to which class a noun beUjngs (and therefore 
which form of the adjective it takes), observe the following rules : — 

Nouns of the 1st Declension are feminine, except those denoting 
male persons, which are masculine : thus insula, casa, ora, 
amita, are feminine ; agricola, nauta, poeta, incola, are 
masculine. 

Nouns of the 2nd Declension ending in us or r are masculine : 
e.g. numerus, scopiilus, patruus, liber, vir. Some exceptions 
will be found later. 

Nouns of the 2nd Declension ending in um are neuter. 



76 



PREPARATIONS 
Table of the Forms of Adjectives. 



SINGULAH 






PLURAL. 




masc. fern. 


neut. 


masc. 


fetn. 


neut. 


1 


magnuB magna 


magnum 


magni 


magnae 


magna 


2 


magne magna 


magnum 


magni 


magnae 


magna 


3 


magnum magnam 


magnum 


magnos 


magnas 


magna 


4 


magni magnae 


magni 


magnorum 


maguarum 


magnorum 


5 
6 


magnS magnae 
magno magna 


magno 
magno 


1 magna 


magnis 


maguis 


1,2 


asper aspera 


asperum 


aspen 


asperae 


aspera 


3 


aspenim asperam 


asperum 


asperSs 


asperas 


aspera 


4 


asperl asperae 


aspen 


asperorum 


asperarum 


asperorum 


5 
6 


aspero asperae 
aspero aspera 


asperS 
asperS 


I aspens 


asp eris 


asperis 


1,2 


noster nostra 


nostrum 


nostri 


nostrae 


nostra 


3 


nostrum nostram 


nostrum 


nostro3 


nostras 


nostra 


4 


nostii nostrae 


nostrl 


nostrorum 


nostrarum 


nostrorum 


5 
6 


nostrS nostrae 
nostro nostra 


nostro 
nostra 


1 nostris 


nostris 


nostris 



Prepositions hitherto found with the Ablative. 



ab ora maritima, §i. 

cum nautfs, §2. 

de vita, §io; de scopulo, §14. 

ex fenestris, §3. 



in { = in) : in Africa, §6. 
( = on) : in arena, § 2. 
sub ( = under) : sub umbra, § 1, 



Prepositions hitherto found with the Accusative. 

inter ferias, §2. 
post cenait), §3. 
props silvam, §3. 



ad silvam, § 5. 

ante ianuam, §1. 

apud amitara meam, §5. 

Circum villam, § 6, 

in ( = into or to) : in Africam 



super oceanum, S7. 



PREPARATIONS 



77 



§i6. 



VI. Ancient Britain. 



t^ In this and the following Preparations all nouns and adjectives of 
the 1st and 2nd Declensions will be given in the Norn. Sing., except when a 
whole phrase is quoted. 



historicus, a, um 

studiosus, a, um 

narro 

proximus, a, um 

proximo anno* 

dum 

erat 

nanabat 



historical 
fond, studious 
I tell, I narrate 
nearest 
last year 
while 

was (he was) 
he used to tell 

or narrate 
(they) used to 

listen 
I used to be 

present 
so, thus, as 

follows 
almost 
whole [total] 
the ivhole of 
Britain 
The adj. totus,a, um 
is irregular in the 
Gen. and Dat. Sing, 
densus, a, um de?ise, thick 
fiuvius river 

Tamesa t Thames 

agerj feld 

frugifer, frugifera fruitful 
frugiferum [fruit-bearing] 



auscultabant 
ad-eram 

SIC 

fere 

totus, a, um 

tola Britannia 



silva Anderida 



the A?idreds- 
weald 

(weald = forest) 
wild, waste 

[vast] 
uncultivated 
wild beast 
ivolf 
bear 
sta^ 

wild boar 
much 
varied 
timber 

[material] 
beech 
Most nouns denoting 
trees are feminine 
known 

V 

i.e. Caesar 

true 

true things, the 

truth 
I affirm, I state 
pine 
Scottish 
was wanting 



vastus, a, um 

incultus, a, um 

fera 

lupus 

ursus 

cervus 

aper| 

multus, a, um 

varius, a, um 

materia 

fagus (fern.) 



notus, a, um 

SI 

Gaius lulius 
verus, a, um 
vera (neut. pi.) 

affirm o 
pinus (fem.) 
Scoticus, a, um 
de-erat 



*Note the Ablative without a Preposition, here meaning ' in ' 
(time when), cf. '§io secundo saeculo. t Tacitus calls the river 
'Tamesa;' Caesar calls it 'Tamesis' (3rd Decl.). 
X Declined like magister. 



78 



PREPARATIONS 



§17. 



liber, libera, 


liber- 


pluvia* 




rain 


um 


free 


nebula 




cloud 


With Abl.jcf. §6, §12 


ater, atra, 


at rum 


dark 


metallum 


metal 


foedus, a. 


um 


hideous 


multl, ae, a 


many 


pruina 




frost 


abundabat 


abounded 


ab-erant 




were absent 




With Abl. 


natura 




nature 


plumbum alt 


um white lead 


piger, pigra, pigi 


- 




i.e. tin 


um 




sluggish 


ferrum 


iron 


testimonium 


testimony 


atque 


and moreover 


nauta Ro 


nanus 


see §15 (Rule 


Tacitus 


Tacitus, 






of Genders) 




a Roman historian 


inquit 




says he 


aurum 


gold 


vix 




scarcely, hardly 


argentum 


silver 


pot-erant 




were able 


margarita 


pearl 
[Margaret] 


-ne 




marks a ques- 
tion 


ostrea 


oyster 


an 




or (in a ques- 


dabat 


gave, yielded 






tion) 


parvus, a, um 


small 


satis 




sufficiently, 


praeclarus, a. 


um famous 






enough 


caelum 


sky, climate 


impiger, impigra. 








impigrum 


active (lit. not 
sluggish) 


turn quoque 


then too, i.e. 
just as now 






creber, crebra 


. 








crebrum 


frequent 









"Note the Ablative without a Preposition, here meaning 'with'; 
pluviis foedum, hideous with rains. Compare § 15, creber pueris, 
croivded with boys. 



PREPARATIONS 



il8. 



incola antlquus see p. 7 5 (Rule 
of Genders) 
ferus, a, um savage 

bellicosus, a, um warlike 



flavus, a, um yellow 

merabrum limb [member] 

robustus, a, um sturdy, robust 

Caledonius Caledonian 



erant 


were 


Cambria 


Wales 


hasta* 


spear 


coloratus, a, ura 


sun-burnt 


sagitta 


arrow 




[colouied] 


essedum 


chariot 


statura 


height, stature 


inter se 


among them- 


niger, nigra, 






selves, with 


nigrum 


black [nigger] 




one another 


universi, ae, a 


all 


pugnabant 


t/tey used to 




[universal] 




fight 


vitrum 


woad (blue 


proelium 


battle 




' colouring 


delectabant 


used to delight 




matter) 


diversus, a, um 


diverse, differ- 


colorabant 


used to colour 




ent 


hodiernus, a, um of the present 


populus 


tribe [a people] 




day 


Celta 


Celt 


vestlmentum 


garment 


sicut 


as (lit. so as, 




[vestment] 




Just as) 


cerium 


skin 


Germanus 


German 


con-stabant 


used to consist 


capillus 


hair 







■ Note Ablative without Preposition (hastis, with spears). 



Past Imperfect Tense of 'sum' and 1st Conjugation 



1st Person 
2nd Person 
3rd Person 



1st Person 
2nd Person 
3rd Person 



SINGULAR. 
eram, I was 

eras, thou wast (you were) 
erat, he (she, it) was 



spectabam, I 
spectabas, you 
spectabat, he[ske, it) 



PLURAL. 
eramiis, we were 
eratis, you were 
erant, they were 



spectabSmiis, we 
spectabatis, you 
spectabaut, they 



The verb 'do,' / give, has the first a short in the Past Im- 
perfect : dabam, dabas, dabat, dabamus, dabatis, dabant. 



8o 



PREPARATIONS 



§19. 

43" In this and the following Preparations the verbs of the 1st Con- 
jugation Present or Past Imperfect Tense will be given in the ist Person Sing, 
of the Present. 



hic 


fiere, at this 


GaUia 




Gaul 




point 


in (with Ace.) 


to, into 


nonne 


7wt 1 ( = non + 


causa* 




for the sake 




ne ; cf. ver- 


frumentum 




corn 




umne, §17) 


armentum 




lierd 


iUe 


lie (i.e. the 


catulus 




dog 




teacher) 


venaticus, a, 


um 


hunting 


aedifico 


I build, §12 


servus 




slave 


loca (neuter) 


plural of 'locus 


captivus 




captive 




(masc.) f^hi:e 


exporto 




T export 


firmatus, a, um 


fortified 


frenum 




bridle 


quintus, a, um 


fifth 


vitrea (neut. 


pi.) 


glass vessels 


Bellum Gallicum 


the Gallic War 
(name of one 


gemma 




gem. precious 
stone 




of Caesar's 


ceteri, ae, a 




the others, the 




works) 






rest 


muiti (masc.) 


many {feofle) 


cetera (neut.) 


the other things, 


puto 


I fancy, think 






Eng. 'etcetera 


itaque 


therefore. 


importo 




I import 




accordingly 


mediocriter 




moderately. 


jlane 


altogether 






tolerably 


Darbarus, a, um 


barbarous 


humanus, a, 


um 


civilized 


agri cultura 


agriculture 






[humane] 




(cultivation 


nee 




and not 




of the land) 


mill turn 




much, very 


etiam 


even, also 


diversus a 




different from 


mercatilra 


commerce 


a = ab, §1 








[merchandize] 


Gain 




the Gauls 


Venetl 


a tribe on th^ 








ivest coast of Gaul 









•Note the Ablative without a Preposition, here meaning 'by': 
causa, literally by cause or by reason ; hence for the sake. 



PREPARATIONS 



§20 



mortul 


the dead 


sacer,. sacra, 




cremo 


I bur7i 


sacrum 


sacred 


sepulchrum 


tomb 


sacra (neut. pi.) 


sacred ritei 




[sepulchre] 




cf. vera, § 1 6 ; 


urna 


urn 




mediterranea 


pu'chre 


beautifully 


Druidae (masc.) 


Druids 


ornatus, a, uin 


ornatnented 


saevus, a, um 


savage, cruel 


fabricare 


to manufacture 


femina 


woman 




[fabricate] 


pro victimis 


instead of 


in-hCiinanus, a, 


um u)bcivilized 


(Abl.) 


victims, 


rota 


wheel 




as victims 


ferratus, a, urn 


fitted with iron 


sacrifico 


I sacrifice 


animi causa 


for the sake of 


uiiser, misera, 






avmsement 


miserum 


unhappy. 




(lit. of the mind) 




miserable 


esca 


food, eating 


cnicio 


T torture 


mediterranea 




trucido 


I slaughter 


(neut. pi.) 


Midlands 


simulacrum 


image 




(midland 


plenus, a, um 


filled (with the 




parts; cf. 


Abl.); ( 


■ixfull (with the 




vera, § 1 6) 


_ Gen.), § 


I3>§i6- 


humo 


I bury 


discordia 


quarrel 


ferlna* 


ftesh of wild 




[discord] 




animals. 


inter se 


see §i8: inter 




game 




se pugnabant 


victito 


T live 


victoria 


victory 


deus 


god 


parabant 


say prepared 


fanum 


shrine 




the way for 


liicus 


grove 







*Note the Ablative without a Preposition, here meaning 'by 
means of : ferina victitabant, they lived on ( = by means of) game. 

Summary of meanings of the Ablative without a Preposition: 
from (§6, §12) with (§§15, 17, 18, 20 after plena) 

at (§9) by (§19) 



in (§10, §16) 



by means of {%2o) 



S2 



PREPARATIONS 



VII. Footprints of the Romans. 

§21. ^" From this point onwards the a of the Ablative Singular, ist 
Declension, is not distinguished by the long mark in the text. 



nuper 


recently, lately 


ambulabitis you will walk 


rae-cum 


with me 


nobis-cum with us 


delectabit 


it will delight 


ego vero / indeed 


inquam 


I say 


ambulabo will walk 


visitare 


to visit 


te-cum with thee, with 


sto 


I stand 


you 


monstra 


show 


mihi to me 


nobis 


to us 


pergratus, a, um very pleasing 


amabo te 


please (lit. / 


moiistrabis you ivill show 




shall love you) 


festuia lente hasten slowly 


ruinae (plur.) 


ruins 


i.e. don't go too fast 


Rutupinus, a, um 


belonging to 


nullus, a, um (ir- 




Richborough 


regular in Gen. 


turn 


then 


and Dat. Sing.) not any 


longus, a, um 


long 


disputo / dispute 


aliquando 


some day 


quota hora at what hour. 


monstrabo 


I ivill show 


at what o'clock 




(them) 


paratus, a, um prepared,ready 


eras 


to-morrow 


eritis you will be 


vobls 


to you 


quinta horf at the fifth kou? 


gratus, a, um 


pleasing 


i.e. at eleven o'clock 


erit 


it will be 


inquiunt they say 


ambulabimus 


we shall walk 





§22. 

postridie 
serenus, a, um 
ientaculum 
dabitis 

vos in viam 



cenare 



on the next day 
clear [serene] 
breakfast 
will you give 
yourselves to 
the road 
i.e. will you start 

to sup, to dine 
from ceno, I sup 



pot-eritis 
Dubrls* 
adventabunt 
intra duas 

horas 
ambulare 
pot-erimus 
unus,a,ura(irreg. one 

inG.&D.Sing.) 



will you be able 
from Dover 
will arrive 
within two 

hours 
to walk 
we shall be able 





PREPARATIONS 


8 


red-ambulabimus 


we shall walk 


nihil 


nothing 




back 


gustabimus 


we shall taste 


decimus, a, ura 


tenth 


prandium 


lunch 


undecimus, a, um 


eleventh 


vobls-cum 


with you 


domi 


at home 


portate 


carry 


spero 


I hope 


crustulum 


cake 


leiunus, a, um 


huni^ry 


pomum 


apple 


erimus 


shall we be 


curabo 


will provide 



*Note the Ablative without a Preposition, here meaning ' from.' 
Rule. — Names of Towns take no Prepositions to express the 
meaning ' from ' or ' to ' wiih a verb of ' going.' 



Future Tense of 'sum' and 1st Conjugation. 



1st Person 
2nd Person 

3rd Person 



SINGULAR. 
erS, I shall be 
eris, thou wilt be 

(you will be) 
erit, he (she, it) will be 



PLURAL. 
erimus, we shall be 
eritis, you will be 

erunt, they will be 



1st Person 
2nd Person 

3rd Person 



gpectsbo, I shall see 
spectabis, thou wilt see 
{you will see) 
speotabit, he [she, it) will see 



spectabimus, we shall see 
spectabitis, you will set 

speotabunt, they will see 



Note. — The verb ' do,' I give, has the a short in the Future : 
dabo, dabis, dabit, dabimus, dabitis, dabunt. Also in 'dare,' to 
give ; and see notes on §5 and §18. 



Imperative of 1st Conjug-ation. 



2nd Person. 



SINGULAR. 
gpecta, see {thou) 



PLURAL. 
Bpeetate, see (ye) 



84 



PREPARATIONS 



§23. 

43" In this and the following Preparations new verbs of the Is! Conjugation, 
Tuture or Imperalive, will be given in the 1st Peis. Sing, of the Present. 



appropinquo 

cupide 

exspecto 

ad sonum 

tintinnSbuiU;Ti 

properavl 

ecce 

ad ianuam 

intraverunt 

exclanjavimus 

euge 

opportune 

adventavistis 



sero 



I approach 

eagerly 

I expect 

■at the soutid 

bell 

I hastened 

behold 

at the door 

they entered 

we exclaimed 

bravo ! 

in the nick of 
time [opportunely] 

you haiie 
arrived 

marks a ques- 
tion, like 
whether 

late 



adventavimus we have 

arrived 
fere * almost 

tertius, a, um third 
fuit it was 

nos dedimus* we gave our- 
selves 
celeriter quickly 

non pot-est is tiot able, can 

not 
fatrgatus, a, um tired [fatigued] 
quota hora est ? what d clock is 

it? 
noiidum not yet 

ad ambulandum for walking 
nos vero that we are I 

(parati sumus) (cf §21) 
bene ambulate lit. walk well, 
i.e. goodbye 



*It is well for the pupil to realize from the firbt that there is no Conjugation 
in which all the verbs form their Perfect Stems in the same way. Such 
formations as ' dedi' are irregular only so far as the Siem is concerned. 



§24. 








inter viam 


on the way 


propinquus, a, um neighbouring 


iBulta 


many things 


paravit 


he prepared 


de (with Abl.) 


about 


quiiiquagesinius 


J 


narravit 


told [narratdi] 


a, um 


fiftieth 


primus, a, um 


first (for Abl. 


copiae (plural) 


forces 




cf. §10) 


transportavit 


he transported 


ante Chr. natum 


cf §10 


navigavit 


he sailed 


bello 


/ wage war 


quo 


whither, to 


jostquam 


after, when 




which 


*^ervil 


a tribe in 


applicavit 


he brought to 




Belgium 




land 


de-bellavit 


he defeated 


diu 


long 


contra (with Ace. 


) against 


disputaverunt 


have disputed 



PREPARATIONS 



8S 



ad navigia 
applicaiida 

idoneus, a, um 

Dubras* 

armatus, a, um 

alius (irregular in 
declension) 

fuerunt 

per (with Ace.) 

properaverunt 

pugna 

ad pugnam 



for vessels to be 
brought to land 
fitted, suitable 
to Dover 
armed 

another 
were 
along 
hastened 
fight, battle 
for battle 



paraveru nt (they) prepared 

se themselves 

necesse necessary 

Romanls (Dat.) for the Ro- 
mans 
ad ancoras de- to fasten to 
ligare anchors, 

to anchor 
vadum shallow place 

equitaverunt they rode 
copiam dederunt they gave an 
opportit7iity 



*The Accusative of the name of a Town without a Prepositon 
sometimes means 'to — '; cf. Rule, §22. 



Perfect Tense of 'sum' and 1st Conjugation. 



1st Person 
2nd Person 

3rd Person 



1st Person 
2nd Person 

3rd Person 



SINGULAR. 
fui, I ivas 
fnisti, thou wast 

{you were) 
fuit, he {she, it) was 



spectavi, I saw 
spectavisti, thou sawest 

{yoii saw) 
speotavit, he {she, it) saw 



PLURAL. 
fiimius, we were 
fuistia, you were 

fuerunt, they were 



spectaviinus, we saw 
speotavistis, you saw 

spectaverunt, they saw 



Notes, i. — The Perfect may often be translated I liave been, 
I have seen, etc. ; virl docti disputaverunt, learned men have 
disputed. 

2. — The verbs ' do,' / give, and ' sto,' / stand, unlike other 
verbs of the ist Conjugation, make the Perfects ' ded-I,' I gave, 
'stet-i,' 1 stood; but the endings (-1, -isti, -it, -imus, -istis, -erunt) 
are the same as in other Perfects ; thus ' ded-erunt,' they gave. 



86 



PREPARATIONS 



§2S 

tS" In this and the following Preparations new verbs of the 1st Conj., 
Perfect Tense, will be given in the 1st Person Singular of the Present. 



adventaveramus 


we had arrived 


nisi 


unless, if . . not 


hic 


here 


ignavus, a, um 


cowardly 


campus 


ike plain 


certe 


at any rate 


apertus, a, um 


open 


officium 


duty 


ad copias 


for forces 


praesto 


I perform 


explicandas 


to be deployed 


congregaverant 


had gathered 


iUlc 


yonder 


impigre 


actively. 


fortasse 


perhaps 




bravely 


piscalorius, a, uni 


fishing 


confusus, a, um 


confused 


deligaverat 


had fastened 


primo 


atfirst 


col-locaverant 


had placed 


laboro 


I labour, am in 




[located] 




difficulties 


incitaverant 


had urged 


tandem 


at length 




[incited] 


propulso 


I drive off 


reliquus, a, urn 


tlu rest 


occupo 


7«/zfi [occupy] 


dubito 


I hesitate 


fuga 


flight 




[doubt] 


dederant 


had given 


aquili-fer 


the eagle-bearer 


numquam 


never 


aquila 


the eagle 


antea 


before 


congrego 


I gather [con- 
gregate] 


steterant 


had stood 




laudandus, a, um laudable 



Pluperfect Tense of 'sum' and 1st Conjugation. 



1st Person 
2nd Person 

3rd Person 



SINGULAR. 
f ueram, / had been 
fueras, thou hadst been 
( y<m had been) 
fuerat, he (she, it) had been 



PLURAL. 
fuerSmuB, we had been 
fueratis, you had been 

fuerant, they had been 



1st Person 
2nd Person 

3rd Person 



spectaveram, / had seen 
spectaveraa, thou hadst seen 

(yoti had seen) 
spectSrerat, he {she, it) had 
seen 



Bpectaveramus, we had seen 
spectaveratig, you had seen 

spectaveraut, they had seen 



PREPARATIONS 



87 



§26. 

^ After this Preparation new verbs of the ist Conjugation, Plujjerfect 
Tense, will be given in the ist Person Singular of the Present. 



postulo 


/ dema?id 


satiatus, a, um 


snfisfied 


Septimus, a, um 


seventh 


mora 


delay 


ruber, rubra, rubr- 


fuerit 


ivill have been 


um 


red 


quando 


when .? 


recreaverimus 


we shall have 


per (with Ace.) 


through, during 




refreshed 


quinque 


five 


nos 


ourselves 


alter, altera. 


a second, an- 


domum 


Iiomewards, 


alterura 


other 




home 


(irregular in Gen 




adventaverimus 


we shall have 


and Dat. Sing 


) 




arrived 


recreavero 


/ shall have 


interea 


meainvhile 




refreshed 


ini AntonI 


my (deal-) 


me 


myself 




Anthony 


. cachinno 


I laugh 


exspectaverit 


will have 
expected 


mox 


soon 



Future Perfect of 'sum' and 1st Conjug'ation. j 


SINGULAR. 
f uero, / shall have been 
fueris, thou wilt have been 
(you will have been) 
fuerit, he {she, it) will have been 


PLURAL. 
fuerimus, we shall have been 
fueritia, you will have been 

fuerint, they will have been 


speotavero, I shall have seen 
speotaveris, thou wilt have seen 
{you "will have seen) 
spectaverit, he {she, it) will have seen 


spectSverimus, we shall have seen 
spectSveritis, you will have seen 

spectaverint, they will have seen 



88 



PREPARATIONS 



VIII. First expedition of C. Julius Ga^sar. 

8 27- ^TFiom this point onwards all new verbs of the ist Conjugation 
will be given in the 1st Person Singular of the Present. 

expeditioji 



expedltio 

Caesaris* 

calor 

solis 

aeris 

neque 

paulo post 

solem obscutav- 

erunt 
imber 
sol 

splendore t 
iterum 
calorem tempcr- 

averat 
de Caesare * 
imperatoie 

interrogo 
cur 

expeditionem 
suam paravit ■ 



of Caesar 

lieat 

of the sun 

of the air 

nor {and . . not) 

a little after 

obscured the sun 
a shower 
the sun 
ivith splendour 
a second time 
had tempei-ed 

the heat 
about Caesar 
general 

[emperor] 
/ ask, enc/uire 
luhy 
he prepared his 

expedition 



inquinius ive say 

proconsul proconsul 

ties three 

nationes tribes [nations] 

dMoA&%itf.2i.gti\vc\- fifty eighth, lit. 

us, a, um 2 from 6oth 

Caesarem pro- had created 

consulem ere- Caesar pro- 



averant 
autem 
esse 
ex-istimo 

revera 

ex nationibus 

auxilium 



consul 
hoivever 
to be 
I consider 

[estimate] 
really 

of the tribes 
help, aid 



auxilia (plur.) auxiliaries 
subministro / supply 

Trinobantes a British tribe 

in Essex 
CassI, 2 a tribe in Herts 

imploro I implore 

* The letter C before Julius Caesar stands for Gains (Gaiuiii, Gai, Gaio). 
tNote the Ablative without a Preposition, here meaning ' with' \ cf. %it,, 1"] , 20. 

Third Declension. 

Nouns like ' Caesar,' ' Expeditio,' etc. 



SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


\ 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 


Caesar, Caesar 
Caesar, o Caesar 
Caesar-em, Caesar 
Caesar-is, Caesat's 
Caeaar-I, to Caesar 
cum Oaesar-e, with Caesar 


Caesar- ea, Caesars 
Caesar-es, o Caesars 
Caesar-ea, Caesais 
Caesar- um, of Caesars 
Caesar-ibus , to Caesars 
cum Caesar-ibus, with Caesars 



PREPARATIONS 



89 



So are declined words like 'aer,' air, 'sol,' sun, and many 
words ending in or, such as 'calor,' heat, 'splendor,' splendour, 
'imperator,' commander-in-chief. So too are declined words like 
' expeditio,' expedition, except that they have dropped an ' n ' in 
the Nom'inative Singular : thus we have — 



1,2 
3 
4 
5 



SINGULAR. 

expeditio 

expedition-em 

expedition-is 

expedition-i 



PLURAL, 
expedition es 
expedition es 
expedition-um 
expedition-ibus 
in expedition-ibus 



6 in expedition-e 
(Many words ending in 0, especially those ending in do and go, 
have also a change of vowel in the stem : see next section, note). 

Nouns of the 3rd Declension in id, do, or go are nearly all 
feminine, except when they denote male persons. The other 
nouns declined like Caesar are mostly masculine, especially those 
ending in or. 

§28. 

avaritia 
exspectatio 
praeda 

cupidus, a, um 
visitandl 
explorandi 
ignotus, a, um 
remotus, a, um 
ignotum 



pro (with Abl.) 



avarice 

expectation 

booty ; cf. § 7 

desirous 

of visiting 

of exploring 

unknown 

remote 

an unknown 

thing 
for, instead of 



pro magnifico est is regarded as a 

magnificent 

thing 
com-para I get together 

re-porto I carry off 

* Note that the stem of this word differs from the Nominative Singular not 
only in havii^ an n, but also in the change of vowel : Nominative Singular 
viulliludo, stem multitudin-. 



venia pardon 

a victor-ibus from the victors 
uUus, a, um any 

(irregular in Gen. 

and Dat. Sing.) 
nisi except ; cf. § 25 

pauci, ae, a a few 

proximus, a um next ; cf. § 16 
multo maior-em much greater, 
lit. greater 
by much 
sescenti, ae, a six hundred 
onerarius, a, um of burden 
legion-es legions 

cum multi- with a multi- 

tiidin-e * tude 



go 



PREPARATIONS 



IX. Peace violated. 

§ 29. tS" In llie following Preparation each new noun of the 3rcl declension 
Hill be given only once (in the Nominative Singular, with the stem added in 
brackets whenever it differs from the Nominative Singular). 



pax (pac-), 3 
violatus, a, uni 
violo 

aestas (aestat-), 3 
qu.irtus, a, um 
dux (due-), 3 
miles (milit-), 3 
eques (equit-), 3 
tempestas 

(tempestat-), 3 
medius, a, um 
navigatio (naviga- 
tion-), 3 
non iam flabat 
prospere 

labor (labor-), 3 



peace 
violated 
I violate 
summer 
fourth 
leader [duke] 
soldier \ym\\\-M'j'\ 
horse-soldier 
weather 

[teiiipest] 
mid *■ 
voyage [naviga 

lion] 
no longer blew 
successfully, 

prosperously 
labour, toil 



rcmigandi of roibing 

virtus (viitut-), 3 pluck [virtue] 
magnopere greatly 

(cf. quantopere hoiv much) 
prior (prior-), 3 former 
inde tJietice 

trecenti, ae, a three hundred 
castra t, 2 catnp 

statio(station-),3 station 

in statione on guard 
reservo / reserve 

periculosus, a, um dangerous 
defensor (defen- defender 

sor-), 3 I 
nudare to strip (cf. 

incitare, to iiri;e on ; 
spectare, § 8; § 12) 
but we should generally say 



* In media navigatione, literally in mid voyage 
in English iji the vdddte of the voyage. 

t A neuler flufai noun of the 2nd declension, with singular meaning. 

JNote the Ablative without a Preposition, properly meaning ' from,' but 
here to be translated by ' of '; so in § 12 and § 6 we might translate llher scholis 
' free o/lessons,' and vnlilid vacal ' he is free «/ service.' 

Third Declension— continued. 
Nouns like 'Pax,' 'Aestas,' etc. 
A great many nouns of the 3rd Declension differ from those 
already learned by adding an s to the Nominative Singular; thus 
from the stem 'pac-' we get the Nominative Singular 'pac-s' 
(written with the letter x for cs) ; but the other cases are formed 
from the stem ' pac-.' When the stem ends in a / (or d), this letter 
disappears in the Nominative Singular when the s is added, but 
not in the other cases. Thus we decline — 

1, 2 pax aestas miles virtus 

3 pac-cm aestat-em niilit-em virtut-em 

4 pac-is aestat-is niilit-is virtut-is 

etc. etc. etc. etc. 



PREPARATIONS 



91 



Nouns of the 3rd Declension that form the Nominative 
Singular by adding s to the stem are mostly feminine, except 
those which denote male persons, like 'miles,' soldier, and a few 
others. 



§30. 


X. Variec 


i contests. 




certamen 


contest 


tempus 


time 


(certamin-), 3 * 




(tempor-), 3 * 


[tempor-ary] 


vlto 


I avoid 


agger, 3 


mound 


Humeri 


river 


testtido (testu- 


tortoise-shell. 


(flumin-), 3* 




din-), 3 


shelter j 


egregie 


excellently 


oppugno 


I attack 


opus (oper-), 3 * 


work [oper-ate] 


vulnus 


woujid 


firmo 


/ strengthen 


(vulner-), 3 * 


[vulnerable] 




[make firm] 


pondus 


weight 


nomen 


name 


(ponder-), 3* 


[ponder-able] 


(nomin-), 3* 


[nomin-ate] 


arma 


arms 


constat 


is known 


(neut. plur.). 


2 


domesticus, a um 


civil 


supero 


r surpass 




[domestic] 


magnitudo 


size, magnitude 


prae-paro 


I prepare 


(magnitudin-) 


3 


arbor, 3,7^'«. 


tree 


robur 


strength 


vallum, 2 


rampart 


(robor-), 3 * 


[cor-robor-ate] 


pro-volo 


I dash forth 


corpus 


body 




cf. volito, §7 


(corpor-), 3 * 


[corpor-al] 


munltio, 3 


bulwark 


hom6(homin-), 3 


man 


aliquantum 


a lot, a consider- 


robusto cor- 


of (lit. with) 


y 


able amount. 


porej 


robust body 



* The nouns in this section in men, us, and ur are Neuters, and therefore 
have the Accusative ihe same as the Nominative. Note, too, the Nominative 
and Accusative plural in a. 

t The testudo was an arrangement of the shields of the soldiers when they 
attacked a fort ; it looked like a tortoise-shell. 

" + Note the Ablative without a Preposition, here translatable by ' of ; the 
AWative here denotes a quality of the persons spoken of, and may be therefore 
called an Adjectival Ablative. 

Third T)ec\Q\iS\On— continued. 

Nouns like 'Flumen,' 'Opus,' Tempus.' 
Neuters ending in men have stems ending in min- from 
which the other cases are formed. Neuters ending in us have stems 
in er- or or-. The last vowel of these stems is always short. 



93 



PREPARATIONS 



Note that the Neuters have the Accusative the same as the 
Nominative, both in the Singular and in the Plural Number 
(as in 2nd Declension), and that their Nominative and Accusative 
Plural end in a (also as in the 2nd Declension). 



SING. 



PLUR. 



1, 2, 3 flumeiv fluiuin-a 

4 flumin-ia flumin-um 

5 flumin-I flilinin-ibus 

6 in llumin e in ilnmin-ibus 



PLUR. 



opus 
oper-ia 
oper-i 
in oper-e 



opera 
oper-iira 
oper-ibus 
in oper-ibus 



§31- 

pro-sum 

fugo 

fugatus, a, um 
in-sto 

(with Dat.) 
ignoro 

praeterea 

incommodum, 2 

nuntio 

tem pastas ( tat-), 3 

litus (lltor-), 3 

afflicto 

§32- 

genus (gener-;, 3 
navis (Gen. PI. 

navium), 3 

navis longa 
classis (Gen. PL 

classium), 3 
onus (oner-), 3 
transportandus, a, 

um 
ad onera trans- 

portanda 



I am helpful, 

do good 
I put to flight 
roicied 
I pursue (lit. 

step upoii) 
I do not know 

[ignore] 
besides 
disaster 
I announce 
tempest 
coast 
wreck [afflict] 

XI. 

kind [gener-al] 
ship [nav-y] 

ship 'of ivar 
fleet 



burden [oner-ous] 
to be trans- 
ported 
for burdens to 
be transported 



insectatio 

(-ion-), 3 
revocare 
novus, a, u-ii 
arma (Neut. 

PI., 2) 
ornandus, a, um 

(from orno 
magno opera 

(Abl. of opus) 
diurnus, a, um 
nocturnus, a, um 
sine (with Abl.) 
reparare 

Roman ships. 

octinganti, ae, a 
hiems (hiani-), 3 
inter 

ducenti, ae, a 
opus (with 

Abl.) 
quomodo 
hostis (Gen. PI. 

hostium), 3 



pursuit 

to recall 

new 

here fittings 

to be equipped 
I equip, adorn) 
= magnopere, 

§ 29 
of the day 
of the night 
without 
to refit, repair 

eight hundred 
winter 
here among 
two hundred 
need (of) , 

how 
enemy 
[host-ile] 



PREPARATIONS 

Third Declension— Conftnued. 



93 



Most nouns of two syllables belonging to ihe 3rd Decl. and 
ending in is have the same form for the Genitive as for the 
Nominative Singular, and form the Genitive Plural in turn : thus 
'navis,' s/itp, ' cla.ssis,' J?eef, 'hostis,' enemy. These nouns are 
mostly feminine, except those denoting male persons, like 'hostis.' 



SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1, 2 
3 
4 
5 
6 


nSvia 
navem 
navig 
navi 
in nave 


naves 
naves 
navium 
navibuB 
in navibuB 



Note that all these forms are of two syllables except the 
Genitive, the Dative, and the Ablative of the Plural. The Gen. 
Plur. has one syllable more than the Nom. Sing., as in §§27-31. 

Note. — Similarly are declined some nouns whose Nominative 
Singular ends in es, e.g., 'clades,' disaster. 



§33- 

ornare to equip 

forma, i form, shape 

puppis, 3 • stern, poop 
accommodatus, a, suited [accom- 

urn modated ] 

carina, i _ keel 

planus, a, urn flat [plane] 

robur (robor-), 3 here oak 
ferreus, a, um 
funis, 3 " 



pellis, 3 '■ 



sive 



made of iron 
rope 

skin, hide 
whether . . . c 



propter( with Ace.) on accoimt of 



llnum, 3 

quia 

plus . . quam 

firmitudo 

(tudin-), 3 
lineus, a, um 
tarn . . quam 
rostrum, 2 
tun is, 3 * 
lamina, i 
quid opus 
tormentum, 2 



flax 

because 

more . . than 

firmness 

made of flax 
so . . as 
beak, i-am 
turret 
plate 
what 7ieed 
a machine foi 
hurling stones t 



* This word is declined like ' navis,' § 32. 
+ The Roman 'tormentum' corresponds to our cannon 



94 



PREPARATIONS 



§34- XII. Alliance of the British tribes. 

finis, 3 * end 

fines, Plur., m. boundaries 
separO I separate 

oriens (orient-), 3 the East] 

[orient-al] 
occidens the West 



alliance 

[society] 
chief 
command 
I entrust 
king 
r-ace [gentik] 



societas 

(societal-), 3 
sunimus, a, um 
imperium, 2 
niando 
rex iieg-), 3 
gens (gent-), 3 

Gen. PI. gentium 
princeps (-cip- , 3 prince 
tamen nevertheless 

pars (part), 3 part 
consocio Tally 

*Declined like ' navis,' § 32. 

t'aboriente' is literally /row; the East; hence o« the East side, on the 
East. Similarly, ' ab occidente,' on the West. 



(Occident-), 3 [occident-alj 
superior previous, past 

(sui)erior-), 3 
contiuuus, a, um continued, un- 
interrupted 
inftnltus, a, um infinite 



Third Declension — Continued. 

Words whose stem ends in two consonants form the Genitive 
Plural in iuni (two syllables more than the Nom. Sing.) : thus 
'gens' (stem 'gent-') race, 'pars' (' part- '), /arA 

Notice that if the stem ends in a t, it is dropped before the .f 
which is added to form the Nominative Singular, as in § 29 ; 
thus 'gens' stands for 'gent-s'j 'pars' for 'part-s.' 

The Nouns whose stem ends in two consonants are mostly 
feminine, like other Nouns that form the Nominative Singular by 
adding .r to the stem (§ 29). 



SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1,2 
3 
4 
5 
6 


* 

gen-s 
gent-em 
gent-is 
gent-i 
cnm gent-e 


gent-5s 
gent-es 
gent-ium 
gent-ibUB 
cum gent-ibus 



But 'urbs' (stem 'urb-'), city, which will be found in the next 
section, does not drop any letter before the s of the Nominative 
Singular ; it is only z.t ot a. d that is dropped before the s. 



PREPARATIONS 



95 



§35- 








caput (capit), 3, 


n. chapter 


de-monstr5 


I point out 


duodecimus, a, um twelfth 


orlgo (origin-), 3 origin 


tertius decimus 


thirteenth 


triquetrus,a, um triangular 


interior (-ior-), 3 


interior 


esse declaro 


I declare to be* 


Belgium, 2 


Be/gium 


lalus (later-), 3 


side [later-al] 


immigro 


I immigrate 


Hispania, i 


Spain 


aetas (-tat-), 3 


age 


septentriones 


the North f 


trans (with Ace. 


\ across 


erro 


I err 


Rhenus, 2 


the Rhine 


Hibernia, 1 


Ireland 


migro 


I migrate 


recte 


rightly 


urbs (urb-), 3 


city [urb-an] 


iudico 


Ijudge 


derivatus, a, um 


derived 


Mona, I 


Anglesey 


*C.. §27, ]. 16 


ssse exislimabant. 


t lit. the seven oxen 


Charles Wain). 


§36. 


XIII. The British seas. 




longitudo 


length 


mare (Abl. Sing. 


the sea 


(-tudin-), 3 


longitude] 


marl), 3, Neu 




circiter 


about 


di-stare 


to be distant 


quingenti, ae, a 


five hundred 


igitur 


thei-efore, then 


mil'ia, 3 (Neut. 


mites, lit. thou- 


maria 


seas 


Plur. of mine,' 


sands {of paces) 


circum-do 


I surround 


a thousand) 




Hibernicus,a,un 


Irish 


septingenti, ae, a 


seven hundred 


marium 


of the seas 


octingenti, ae, a 


eight hundred 


usitatus, a, um 


used, usual. 


octoginta 


eighty 




common 



Third XiQzX&cma^— continued. 

Nouns ending in e like ' mare,' sea, of the 3rd Declension aie 
Neuter. They form the Genitive Plural in ium, the Nominative 
and Accusative Plural in ia, and the Ablative Singular (like the 
Dative Singular) in l. Thus 



SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1, 2, 3 mare 

4 maria 

5 marl 

6 in mari 


maria 
marium 
maribus 
in maribug 

1 



96 



§37- 



PREPARATIONS 

XIV. Britain subdued. 



pacatus, a, um 


subdued 


ordo (-din-), 3 


rank 


concursio (-ion-), 


3 engagement 




[ordin ary] 




ex-cursion] 


consulto 


on purpose 


iter (itiner-), 3 * 


march 




[by consultation] 


fortiter 


bravely 


essedarius, 2 


charioteer 


impugno 


T attack 


pes (ped-), 3, m. fool 


coliors (cohort-), 


cohort 


pedibus 


on foot 


3t 




ita 


thus 


sui 


their own men 


mobilitas(-tat-) 


3 mobility 


perturbo 


I perturb. 


stabilitas (-tat-) 


3 stability 




throw into 


pedes (pedit-), 


foot-soldier 




confusion 


3l 




mos (mor-), 3 


custom 


praesto (cf. § 2 


5 I exhibit 


iustus, a, um 


just, proper 


huiusmodi 


of this kind 


omnes 


all 


intervallum, 2 


interval 


*This is a very 


peculiar word ; t1 


le Nominative Singular is not formed 


directly from the stem. 






t Declined like 


pars ' (stem ' part- 


'), § 34- 




{ Declined like 


mTles' (stem ' mili 


- '), ' eques' (stem 


equit-'), § 29. 


§38. 








collis, 3* 


hill 


servo 


here I watch 


legatus, 2 


lieutetiant- 


paullum 


a little 




general [legate] 


decllno 


I turn aside 


subito 


suddenly 




[decline] 


superior (cf. § 34) 


superior, victor- 


de via 


fiom the road 




ious 


vasto 


I lay waste 


quattuor 


four 




[de-vast-ate] 




* Declined like ' na 


vis,' ' hostis,' § 32. 




§39- 








ripa, I 


bank 


palus (palud-). 


3 marsh 


suilis, 3 * 


itake 


ovis, 3 * 


sheep 


acutus, a, um 


sharp [acute] 


bos (bov-), 3 t 


ox 


profundus, a, um 


deep [profounil] 


dtiabus 


Abl. o{ duae 


caput(capit-),3,n 


head; cf. § 35 


expugno 


I take by stoi in 


longe 


far 


fugo 


I put to flight 




* Declined like 


' nSvis,' § 32. 




t This is an irrepilar word : bos, bo 


/-em, -is, -i, -e ; Gen. Plur. bo-um. 





PREPARATIONS 


97 


§40. 








prae-sum (with 


/ am in com- 


defectio (-ion-), ; 


, defection 


Dat.) 


mand of 


condicio (-ion-), 3 conJition 


pugnandl 


of fighting; cf. 


dellbero 


I deliberate 




§ 28, 1. 3 


veto 


I fo}-bid 


frustra 


m vain 


vexo 


I annoy, vex 


victores 


= were victors 


tributum, 2 


tribute 


civitas (-tat-), 3 


state [city] 


inipero 


I impose 


oro 


I ask, entreat 


(Dat.) 


(upon) 


confirmo 


I establish 


obses (obsid-), 3 hostage 




[confirm] 


pro (with Abl.) 


for, on behalf of 


tot (indeclinable 


so many 




(cf. §§28,33) 


adj.) 




ara, i 


altar 


clades, 3 * 


disaster 


focus, 2 


hearth 


raaxime 


chiefly 


tropaeum, 2 


trophy 


* This and some 


other nouns of the 


?td Declension differ from ' navis ' only 


in tlie Nominative S 


ngular ; see § 32 (Note). In these woi 


ds the Nominalivii 


and Accusative Plural is the same as the Nominative SinguU 


ir. 


§41- 


XV. Hea 


rts of oak. 




aes (aer-), 3, n. 


brass 


digitus, 2 


finger [digit] 


triplex (iriplic-), 


triple 


monstrans 


pointing 


. 3> a'dj- 




(monstrant-). 


3> adj. 


fortis, 3, adj. 


brave, strong 


statio (-ion-), 3 


here road- 


admirabilis,3,adj. 


admirable 




stead ;zL%2^ 


insigne, Neuter of 




tutus, a, um 


safe 


insignis, 3, adj. 


distinguished 


illae 


yon, t/wse 


facinus (facinor-), 


deed, achieve- 


optime 


excellently, 


3 


ment 




here = hurrah 


quod 


that 


adhuc 


hitherto (^\xc = 


orbis, 3, m. 


circle [orb] 




hither, ad = to) 


orbis terrarum 


= the world 


grandis, 3, adj. 


big [grand] 


tarn 


so (cf. §33) 


per-grandis, 3, 


very big 


mirus, a, um 


wonderful 


adj. 




sententia, i 


opinion 


"omnis, 3, adj. 


every 


comprobo 


I approve of 


orants, Plur. 


all 


nonus, a, um 


ninth 


aries (ariet-), 3, in 


. ram 



Note. — The heading (Robur et aes triplex) is a quotation from Horace 
(Odes I. 3, 9) and is hei-e applied both to the courage of the ancient Britons 
and to the modem ships of war described in this section, 

7 



98 


PREPARATIONS 




§42. 








veteranus, a, um 


veteran, old 


prOpositum, 2 


proposal 


mllito 


I serve 


per-gratus, a, um 


very pleasing 


custos (custod-), 3 


guard 


ad navigandum 


for sailing 


Grandis, 3, adj. 


the Majestic 


denego 


I say no [deny] 


Regalis, 3, adj. 


the Royal Sov- 


omnia, Neut. PI. 


all things, 




ereign 


of oninis 


everything 


Magnifica, i, adj. 


the Magnificent 


dulce, Neut. Sing 


. sweet, pleasant 


Tonans (Tenant-) 


the Thunderer 


ofdulcis, 3, ad 


■ 


3. adj. 




lenis, 3, adj. 


gentle [lenient] 


Arrogans (Arro- 


the Arrogant 


brevl, Abl. Sing. 


irief, short 


gant-), 3, adj. 




of brevis, 3. 




Ferox (Feroc-), 3, 


the Furious 


adj. 




adj. 


lit. warlike 


classiarii, 2 


seajnejt, men oj 


tegimen (-min-), 3 


covering 




the fleet 


in GrandT 


in the Majestic 


ingens (ingent-), 


huge 


(Abl. of Grandi 


s) 


3. adj. 




praefectus classis 


admiral 


machina 


fnachine 


cur 


why 







Adjectives of the Third Declension. 

Adjectives of the 3rd Declension in is are declined : — 

(i) in the Masculine and Feminine like ' navis ' (§32), 

except that the Ablative Singular ends in i (not -e) -. 

(2) in the Neuter like ' mare ' (§ 36). 



SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1, 2 
3 
4 
6 
6 


masc. and fern. neui. 

fortis forte 
fortem forte 
fortis fortis 
forti forti 
forti forti 


Hiasc. antijem. Kent. 

fortes fortia 
fortes fortia 
fortium fortium 
fortibus fortibus 
fortibus fortibus 



PKEPARATIONS 



99 



Some adjectives of the 3rd Declension which do not end in 
is have no separate form for the Nominative Singular of the 
Neuter; in the Masculine and Feminine they are declined like 
' gens ' (§ 34) : thus— 



S/JfGULAJC. 


PLURAL. 




masc andJefH, neut. 


masc and fern. 


neut. 


1,2 


ingens 


ingens 


ingentes 


ingeutia 


3 


ingentem 


ingens 


ingentes 


ingentia 


4 


ingentis 


ingentis 


ingentiiuu 


ingentiiun 


5 


ingenti 


ingenti 


ingentibus 


ingentibus 


G 


ingenti 


ingenti 


ingentibus 


ingentibus 


§43. 






ad versus,- a, um 


adverse 


soninio 


I dream 


taberna, i 


inn [tavern] 


'membrls robustis 


Abl. * 


tenebrae, i, Plur. 


darkness 


terra marique 


by land and by 


lux (luc-), 3 


light 




sea 


anxius, a, um 


anxious 


pugnans (pugn- 


fighti7ig 


multa, Neut. PI. 


many things 


ant-), 3, adj.t 




of raultus 




salvus, a, um 


safe 


ambulatio(-i6u-),3 


walk 


' fac (Imperative 


■make 


iitilis, 3, adj. 


useful 


of 'facio,' 




vehiculum, 2 


carriage 


I make. 






[vehicle] 


mater (matr-), 


viother 


nox ( 


noct-), 3 


night 









* The Abl. is here translatable by ' with ' ; cf. robusto corf ore, § 30. 
+ The Adjectives in -ans (stem -ant-) are declined like ingens (stem ingent-), 
the only difference being in the last vowel of the stein 



DRILL EXERCISES. 

[The sections of these drill exercises are numbered to correspond with the 
sections of the text on which they give practice. All the words occurring in them 
will be found in the corresponding sections of the " Preparations" (pp. 59 ff.) 
The Latin sentences may be used for viva voce practice, and may be varied at 
the discretion of the teacher by substituting other words that have been used in 
the text of the story. They will also serve as inodels for translating the English 
sentences that follow them into Latin. The numbers in brackets in thi 
Exercises refer to sections of the " Preparations" not to sections of the Ex-ercises 
t/iemselves ; and they serve the purpose of an English-Latin Vocabulary. Thus 
in Ex. 4 {p. 107) the reference to %2 after the word 'for' means that the 
Latin word wanted will be found in §2 of the Preparations (p. 6i),'\ 

§1. {Nominative and Ablative Singular.) 

Villa est bella. 

Castanea est bella. 

Ancilla in villa habitat. 

Ora maritima non procul a^ villa est. 

Noil procul ab era maritima habito. 

Sub castauea interdum canto. 



How pretty is the chestnut-tree ! 
Not far from the chestnut-tree a nightingale sings. 
Not far from the country-house is the sea-shore.^ 
Not far from the sea-shore is the chestnut-tree. 
In the country-house I now live. 

' a is used for ab before a consonant. 

'Order of Words, Rule i. — Put the Adjective immediately AFTEH 
its Noun. The English order is just the opposite ; thus where English says 
•a pretty house,' Latin says 'a house pretty' ; where English says 'the sea- 
shore ' or ' the maritime shore' Latin says 'the shore maritime.' This rule 
applies also to Possessive Adjectives, like 'my,' 'your,' 'his,' 'our,' 
'their': thus where English says 'my aunt' Latin siys 'aunt mine.' But 
the rule does not apply to Adjectives used with the verb ' to be,' as in ' the 
country-ho'jse is pretty ' or ' how pretty the country-house is I ' 



I02 DRILL EXERCISES 

§1 continued. {Genitive Singular.) 

Amita mea sub umbra castaneae interdum cantat. 

Cum amita mea sub umbra castaneae interdum canto. 

Ancilla amitae meae in villa habitat. 

Ancilla in villa amitae meae habitat 

lanua non procul ab ora maritima est. 



My aunt's country house is pretty. 

The door of the country-house is not far from the sea- 
shore. 1 

Where is the nightingale ? 

The nightingale sometimes sings under the shade of the 
chestnut-tree. 

The nightingale does not live (say not lives) in the chestnut 
tree. 



After §T. Conversation. 

Q. Ubi est villa ? 

A. Villa non procul ab ora maritima est 

Q. Ubi est castanea ? 

A. Castanea in area est. 



•Order of Words, Rule 2.— Put the Adverb BEFORE the Verb or 
other word v/hioh it qualifies. The English order is often different ; thus 
where English says 'sings well' Latin says 'well sings.' English may say 
' sings sometimes ' or ' sometimes sings,' but Latin always says ' sometimes 
Dings.' This rule applies to the Adverb non, which must always come 
immedialily before the word which it negatives ; and it also applies to 
Adverbial phrases formed with Prepositions, such as ' far from the sea-shore ', 
' under the shade of the chestnut-tree ' ; thus for ' the nightingale sings under 
the shade of the chestnut-tree' say ' the nightingale under the sliade of the 
chestnut-tree sings '. 



DRILL EXERCISES IO3 

Q. Ubi ancilla cenam parat ? 

A. Ancilla sub umbra castaneae cenam interdum paraL 

Q. Ancilla in villa habitat ? * 

A. Ancilla in villa habitat. 



§ 2. [Nominative Plural.) 

Scaphae non procul a villa sunt. 

Feriae sunt beatae. 

Beatae sunt feriae. 

Magnae sunt procellae in ora maritima, 

Nautae procul ab ora maritima sunt 

Nautae in scapha sunt. 

Scapha non magna est. 



Where are the boats ? 

The boats are on the sand. 

Sailors live not far from the sand of the sea-shore. 

I sometimes sail in a boat with a sailor. 

Chains are in the boat. 

Anchors and chains are on the sea-shore. 



§2 conlinued. {Genitive Plural.) 
Scaphae nautarum interdum magnae sunt. 
Ancorae scapharum magnarum magnae sunt. 
Ancorae scapharum non magnarum non magnae sunt. 



' Questions may be asked in conversational Latin, as in English, simply by 
changine; the tone of the voice, and without any interrogative particle ; e.g. 
•vis pugnare?' yau want to fight? (Plautus, Rudens ion). This is very 
common in Plautus and Terence. But it is easy to introduce the particle 
' -ne ' to the pupil from the first, if the teacher prefers ; e.g. Habitatne 
ancilla in villa ? 



104 DRILL EXERCISES 

The boats of the sailors are not far from the door of the country 
house. 

The anchors of the boats are on the sand. 

The ancliors and the chains of the anchors are on the sand. 

The inhabitants of country-houses are not sailors. 

The courage of the inhabitants of the sea-shore is great. 



§ 3. (Ablative Plural.) 

Scaphae in undis sunt. 

Undae sub scaphis sunt 

In scaphis sunt nautae. 

Procella est : undae non caeruleae sunt. 

Nautae in undis non caeruleis navigant. 

Nautae in casis albis habitant. 



Sailors often sail in boats. 
I often sail with the sailors. 

Not far from the windows of the cottages are the waves of the 
sea-sliore. 

My aunt is often* in the cottages of the farmers. 
There-is^ a wood not far from the cottages of the farmers. 



§ 3 continued. {Accusative Singular and Plural after a Pre- 
position ) 

Ante villam est arena. 

Ante casas nautarum est ora mariiima. 

Ora maritima prope villam amitae meae est. 

Prope casas agricolarum est silva. 

Post cenam in scapha non navigo. 

Post ferias procul ab ora maritima habito. 

• Sec Rule 2 (Order of Words). 

"There-is' and 'there-are' muit be translated simply by the verb: say 
Kot far from the cottages is a wood. 



DRILL EXERCISES I05 

Before the door of the country-house is the sand of the sea-shore. 

Near the wood are the cottages of the farmers. 

During the holidays I sometimes sail in boats. 

After the holidays I do not stay^ in the country-house of my aunt. 

Before the holidays I do not sail in boats. 



§ 3 continued. (Accusative Singular and Plural depending on a 
Verb.) 

Villam ex ora maritima specto. 

Fenestras villae ex ora maritima specto. 

In arena scapham et ancoras et catenas specto. 

In silva plantas et herbas specto. 

Plantas et herbas amo : bacas amo. 

Nautae casas albas amant. 

Casae albae nautas delectant. 



I love the sand.^ 

I love the sand of the sea-shore. 

I love boats and anchors and chains 

Waves delight sailors. 

Plants delight my aunt. 

My aunt loves sailors and farmers. 

From the windows of the cottages the sailors see the waves. 

Boats delight sailors : sailors love boats. 

Before the holidays I do not see boats and the sea-shore. 



^'1 do not stay' is an English way of saying ' I stay not' ; in Latin there 
will be only one word for ' I do stay, ' and the word for ' not ' must come before 
it, (For ' stay ' say live. ) Similarly in the next sentence ' I do not sail.' 

' Order of Words, Rule 3. — Put the Accusative before the Verb on 
which it depends. 



I05 DRILL EXERCISES 

Complete the following sentences by inserting a l^erb. 

Oram maritimam . 

Ora maritima nos . 

Scaphas albas . 

Scaphae interdum caeruleae . 

Ora maritima bella. 



Complete the following sentences by inserting a Preposition in tJu 
first place and a Verb in the second, 

arena scaphae. 

. Oram maritimam nautas 

Agricolae silvam . 

nautis interdum . 



■ agricolis interdum 



After § 3. Conversation. (Quid = what.) 

Q. Quid ex fenestra spectas ? 

A. Ex fenestra undas et cram maritimam specto. 

Q. Oram maritimam amas ? 

A. Oram maritimam amo. Undae me delectant. 

Q. Silvam non amas ? 

A. Silvam amo. Silva me delectat. 

Q. In silva interdum ambulas ? 

A. In silva saepe ambulo. 

Q. Ubi est silva ? 

A. Silva non procul a villa est. 

Q. Quid est in silva ? 

A. In silva est copia plantarum et herbarum 

Q. Bacas non amas f 

A. Quantopere me bacae delectant 1 



DRILL EXERCISES I07 

§4. {Vocative Singular and Plural^ 

Inter ferias te, ora maritima, et vos, undae caeruleae, saepe 
specto. 

Vos, undae caeruleae, Britannia amat. 

Te, regina mea, amo ; te, patria mea, amo. 

Vos, incolae Africae Meridianae, regina insularum Britannic- 
arum amat. 



I love thee, [o] Queen Victoria. 

Victoria is queen not only of the British islands, but also of 
Canada, of Australia, of South Africa. 

I love thee, [o] South Africa ; for (§ 2) South Africa is my 
native-land. 

I love you, [o] inhabitants of Britain; for South Africa is a 
British colony. 

Great is the glory of the British colonies. 



§ 5. (Dative Singular^ 

Silva Lydiae laetitiam dat 

Columbae Lydiae laetitiam dant. 

Lingua Francogallica Lydiae laetitiam non dat. 

Tu, Lydia, inter ferias magistrae tuae operam non das. 

Ego inter ferias linguae Latinae operam non do. 



India gives delight to the Queen ^ of the British isles. 

But India is not a British colony. 

The British colonies also give delight to the British Queen. 

Canada gives delight to Britain. 

For Canada is a great British colony. 

' Order of Words, Role 4. — Put the Dative before the Accusative. 
(Note that the gift stands in the Accusative, and the person to whom the gift is 
made in the Dative. ) 



I08 DRILL EXERCISES 

§ s continued. {Dative Plural.) 

Undae caeruleae nautis laetitiam dant. 

Procellae nautis laetitiam non dant. 

Plantae et herbae agricolis laetitiam dant. 

Agricolae scaphis operam non dant. 

Inter ferias linguis antiquis operam non saepe do. 



The Queen of Britain gives attention to the British colonies. 
The British colonies give delight to the inhabitants of the 
British isles. 
Sailors give attention to boats and anchors and chains. 
My aunt gives attention to the cottages of the farmers and sailors. 
Lydia gives attention to doves. 



After § 5. {Practice in translation of English Prepositions.) 
Make Latin sentences containing translations of the following 

phrases, and then say which of these English Prepositions are not 

translated by Prepositions in Latin. 

in a country-house. in country-houses, 

out-of a country-house, out-of country-houses, 

not far from a country-house. not far from country-houses 

to a country-house to country-houses 

(^ith a Verb of 'going.') {with a Verb of 'going.'') 

of a country-house. of country-houses, 

with my aunt. with ray aunts, 

to my aunt to my aunts 

{with a Verb of ' giving.") {with a Verb of ' giving.') 

under a boat. under boats, 

before supper. during the holidays, 
after supper. 



DRILL EXERCISES 



io9 



After § 5. Translate and learn the following tables containing 
forms of Pronouns hitherto found. 







SINGULAR. PLURAL. 


1ST Person. 


Nominative Cask. 


ego nos 




Accusative Case. 


me nos 


3ND Person. 


?JoMiNATivE Case. 


tu vos 




Accusative Case. 


te vos 


Nominative 


Case with Veres. 






SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1ST Person. 


ego in villa habito. 


nos in villa habitamus. 


2ND Person. 


tu in villa habitas. 


vos in villa habitatis. 


3RD Person. 


amita mea in villa 


amitae meae in villa 




habitat. 


habitant. 


Accusative 


Case with Verbs. 






SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1ST Person. 


amita mea me amat 


amita mea nos amat. 


2ND Person. 


amita mea te amat. 


amita mea vos amat. 


3RD Person. 


amita mea villam amat. amita mea casas amat 



After % 5. Conversation. 

(Recapitulation of ist Declension and Present Te?ise of ' sum ' 
and 1st Conjugation^ Quis = who. 

Q. Quis in villa nunc habitat ? 

A. Lydia, consobrina mea, in villa nunc habitat. 

Q. Tu quoque apud amitam tuam nunc habitas? 

A. Ego quoque apud amitam meam nunc habito. 

Q. Quid curat Lydia ? 

A. Lydia columbas curat. 

Q. Linguae Francogallicae operam dal ? 

A. Linguae Francogallicae operam non dat : nam feriae nunc 
sunt. 

Q. Tu linguae Latinae inter ferias operam das ? 

A. Linguae Latinae inter ferias operam non do. 



no DRILL EXERCISES 

Q. Ubi es inter ferias ? 

A. Apud amitam meam inter ferias sum. 

Q. Quid te inter ferias delectat ? 

A. Arena, ora maritima, scaphae me infer ferias delectant. 

Q. In scaphis interdum navigas ? 

A. In scaphis saepe navigo. 

Q. Procellas non formidas ? 

A. Cum nauta navigo. 

Q. Tu et Lydia in silva interdum anibulatis ? 

A. In silva interdum ambulamus. 



After § 5. [Present Indicative of ' sum.') ' 

I am an inliabitant of Britain. 

Thou, [o] Canada, art a British colony. 

Canada is an ancient (antiqud) colony of Britain. 

We are inhabitants of the British isles. 

You, [o] British colonies, are far from the British isles. 

There-are British colonies in Australia. 



After § 5. [Present Indicative of the ist Conjugation^ 

I now live in my aunt's country-house not far from the sea 
shore. 

You, Lydia, now live with my aunt. 

Your schoolmistress lives far from the sea-shore. 

During the holidays we often sail in boats : and we do not give 
attention to the languages of Rome and Greece. 

You, [o] blue waves, now delight us. 

During the holidays the languages of Rome and Greece do not 
delight us. 

^Agreement of the Verb with the Subject. — The Verb must be 
of the same Person and Number as its Subject (that is, the person or 
thing that ' does ' or ' is '). 



DRILL EXERCISES III 



§6. {2nJ Declension in -us. Singular Number. \ 

Hortus bellus est. 

Tu, horte, non magnus es. 

riortum bellum inter ferias saepe visito. 

Violae horti belli caeruleae sunt. 

Patruus mens horto bello aquam dat. 

In horto bello sunt rosae. 



My^ uncle lives in a country-house near the sea-shore. 1 love 
my uncle. I often visit my uncle's garden. I sometimes water 
the roses and violets of the garden. I often walk in the garden 
with Lydia. Sometimes I walk round the wall of the garden with 
my uncle. There is a stream not far from the garden. In the 
stream, is an abundance of water. The garden gives delight to 
my uncle. 



§ 7. {Second Declension in -us, Plural Number^ 

Mergi in ora maritima nidificant. 

Vos, mergi, in era maritima nidificatis. 

Mergos in ora maritima non capto. 

Cibus mergorum in oceano est. 

Mergis inter ferias operam do. 

Corvi cum mergis non nidificant, non volitant. 



There-is a great number of elms in my uncle's garden 
Many^ crows live in the elms. Sea-gulls do not make-nests in 



^Note that the adjectives in these early exercises (§§ i-il) have always the 
same endings as their Nouns. 

"The Latin Adjectives meaning 'many', 'some', 'all', 'few', generally 
stand before their Nouns (hot after them, like most Adjectives ; see Rule I of 
Order, p. loi). 



[12 DRILL EXERCISES 

elms. I like to watch (say gladly watch) the sea-gulls, when 
I am on the sea-shore. During the holidays I sometimes give 
food to the horses of my uncle's farm. Lydia gives food to the 
cocks and hens. INIy uncle gives attention to his farm and his 
horses and cows and pigs. The crows give delight to my 
uncle. 



After § 7. Conversation. 

Q. Agellus patrui tui tibi et Lydiae laetitiam dat ? 

A. Agellus patrui mei nos delectat. 

Q. Quid in agello est ? 

A. In agello sunt equi et vaccae et porci et galli galHnae- 
que. 

Q. Quis equos et vaccas et porcos curat? 

A. Ego equis interdum cibum do ; sed rustici vaccas et porcos 
curant. 

Q. Quis gallis gallinisque cibum dat ? 

A. Lydia gallis gallinisque cibum saepe dat, 

Q. Ubi habitant rustici ? 

A. Rustici in vico habitant, non procul ab agello 



§ 8. {2nd Declension continued.) 

The blue waves foam and murmur round my uncle's garden. 
I like to watch (say gladly watch) the blue waves of the 
ocean. I like to walk to the high cliffs of the sea-shore. 
The lighthouses of the French- coast (say shore) are not far 
distant. The moon and stars often light-up the ocean. It 
delights me to see the white cliffs and the waves. Boats 
carry sailors on the ocean ; sailors carry boats on the sand. 



DRILL EXERCISES II3 

After § 8. Conversation. 

Q. Quid tu et Lydia in horto patrui tui spectatis ? 
A. Non solum rosas et violas sed etiam corvos spectamus. 
Q. Quid ex horto spectatis ? 
A. Mergos interdum ex horto spectamus. 
Q. Ubi sunt nidi mergorum ? 

A. Nidi mergorum in scopulis orae maritimae sunt ; sed non 
nulli ex mergis in insulis prope oram raaiitimam nidificant. 
Q. Ubi praedam suam captant ? 
A. Praedam suam in oceano captant. 
Q. Mergi interdum super agellum volitant? 
A. Super agellum volitant; nam ibi quoque cibum suum captant. 
Q. Quid ex scopulis orae maritimae spectatis? 
A. Ex scopulis pharos orae Francogallicae spectamus. 



§ 9. {2nd Declension in -urn.) 

Oppidum antiquum in Cantio est 

Te, oppidum antiquum, amo. 

Oppidum antiquum inter ferias interdum visito. 

Fundamenta oppidi antiqui magna sed non alta sunt. 

Oppido antiquo inter ferias operam do. 

In oppido antiquo nummi Romani sunt. 

Oppida antiqua me delectant. 

Vos, oppida antiquEi, amo. 

Oppida antiqua libenter visito. 

Aedificia oppidorum antiquorum interdum Roniana sunt. 

Oppidis antiquis libenter operam do. 

In oppidis antiquis nummi Britannici interdum sunt. 



Where is Kent? Kent is in South Britain. The coast (say 
ihfre) of Kent is not far from the French coast. My uncle's farm 
is in Kent. Dover and Richborough are not far from my uncle's 



114 DRILL EXERCISES 

farm. There-are traces of a Roman amphitheatre near Rich- 
borough. London also is an ancient town. London is not far 
distant from Kent. There-are many ancient towns on British 
soil. In Britain we often see the foundations of Roman buildings. 



After §9. Conversation. 
Q. Ubi habitant patruus tuus et amita tua ? 
A. In Cantio habitant, inter Dubras et Rutupias. 
Q. Quid in Cantio spectas ? 

A. {Here may be introduced all the Nouns hithe7-to learned. 
Singular or Plural Number^ 



§ 10. (snd Declension in -um continued.) 

I often see the ancient castle, when I visit Dover. The castle 
is on the cliffs, near the sea-shore. The walls of the castle are not 
ancient ; but there are relics of ancient buildings in the castle. 
At-the-present-day there-is a church near the relics of the ancient 
buildings. The church also is ancient ; for it was a consecrated 
building in the second century after the birth of Christ (say after 
Christ born.) 

§11. {2nd Declension in -um continued.) 

From the windows of the castle we see many vessels. There- 
are many vessels in the English Channel. Many vessels sail 
round Britain. I see the flags of British and French vessels. 
But where are the German and Belgian vessels ? I do not now 
oee German and Belgian vessels in the English Channel. But 
many German and Belgian vessels sail to Britain.^ 



' Imitate in Africam Meridianam, So, too, in future exercises when going 
or sailing to a Country is spoken of^ 



DRILL EXERCISES IIS 

After § 1 1. Conversation. 

Q, Dubras et Rutupias interdum visitas f 

A. Dubras saepe visito. 

Q. Quid ibi spectas ? 

A. Castellum antiquum ibi specto. 

Q. Quid in castello spectas ? 

A. In castello speculam antiquam specto. 

Q. Quid ex castello spectas ? 

A. Ex castello fretum Gallicum et clivos gramineos specto. 

Q. Quid in freto Gallico spectas ? 

A. in freto Gallico navigia specto. 

Q. Navigia libenter spectas ? 

A. Nonnulla ex navigiis in patriam meam navigant. 



§ 12. {2nd Declension in -er.) 

Puer Marcus condiscipulus meus est. 

Tu, puer Marce, mihi praecipuus amicus es. 

Puerum Marcum saepe visito. 

Pueri Marci patria est Caledonia. 

Puero Marco feriae magnam laetitiam dant. 

Cum puero Marco saepe nato. 

Duo pueri prope Dubras habitant.' 

Vos, pueri, condiscipuli mei estis. 

Pueros, condiscipulos meos, pilae delectant. 

Patria puerorum procul a Cantio est. 

Pueris ludi in arena laetitiam dant. 

Cum pueris interdum in scapha navigo. 



Two boys are my friends. They live in Kent, but Scotland is 
the native-land of the boys. The boys are my schoolfellows. I 
often visit the boys during the holidays. Sometimes I swim with 
the boys in the blue waves. How much it delights us boys to see 
the great waves ! 



Il6 DRILL EXERCISES 

§ 13. [2nd Declension in -er continued^ 

During the holidays a boy does not pay attention to lessons. 
The ancient languages of Greece and Rome do not delight a boy 
during the holidays. There-are many amusements of a boy when 
he is free ^ from lessons. Games of ball give great delight to a 
boy, not only during the holidays but also when he is not ^ free 
from lessons. 

Peter is a sailor. I like Peter. Peter's boat is a source (§9)' 
not only of amusement but also of gain to Peter. 



.4^1?'' §13. Conversation. {Quot. = how many.) 

Q. Quot tibi amici sunt ? 

A. Duo mihi sunt amici. 

Q. Ubi habitant amici tui ? 

A. Prope Dubras nunc habitant amici mei. 

Q. Pueros interdum visitas ? 

A. Pueros saepe visito. 

Q. Quid vos pueros inter ferias delectat ? 

A. Ludi pilarum, castella in arena aedificare, in undis natare, 
in scaphis navigare nos delectant. 

Q. Undas spumiferas non formidatis ? 

A. Undas non formidamus. 

Q. Vos pueri interdum remigatis ? 

A. Interdum remigamus, cum undae non nimis asperae sunt. 

Q. Quis remigat cum undae asperae sunt ? 

A. Cum undae nimis asperae sunt, Petrus remigat vel veils 
rninistrat. 

'The Adjective used with the Verb ' to be ' must be in the same Case and 
Number as the Subject of which it is said ; thus here 'free' must be Nominative 
Singular, because ' he ' is Nominative Singular. 

''See Order of Words, Rule 2. Here 'not' negatives 'free' and must 
therefore stand immediately before it. 

' Where a number is quoted like this in brackets, it means that the word 
required can be found in a certain section of the Preparations. 



DRILL EXERCISES I17 

S 14. {2nd Declension continued: 'vir'.) 

There is a nobleman^ mentioned in a play^. The nobleman's 
life is unhappy. The man has' two sons. The son Edgar* 
is faithful. But the son Edmund * does not love the nobleman. 
The nobleman prepares to hurl himself down-from a cliff. 
The cliff is near Dover. But the faithful son walks to the cliff 
with the nobleman, and saves the life of the unhappy man. 



After § 14. 

1. Write t7Vo sentences about the things seen in Kent during the 
holidays. In the first sentence say 'During the holidays I see 

. . . .' ; in the second sentence say ' How much it delights me to 
see . . . . ' {and here put in the things that you like best to see). 

2. Repeat the table of Pronouns given after § 5, and add the 
Dative Cases, Singular a?id Plural (mihi, tibi, nobis, vobis). 
Make up sentences containing these Datives. 



§ 15. (2nd Declension in -er continued.) 

Magister noster vir doctus est. 

Tu, magister, mihi carus es. 

Magistrum nostrum amo. 

Libri magistri nostri pulchri sunt. 

Libri magistro nostro magnam laetitiam dant. 

Cum magistro nostro saepe arabulamus. 

Magistri nostri viri docti sunt. 

Vos, magistri, pueris pigris non cari estis. 

Magistros multi pueri formidant. 

' Note that the Adjective in this case has not the same ending as the Noun ; 
so, tuo, often in the following exercises. 

' Say in a pJay mentioned; see Order of Word?, Rule 2. 

' Say to the man there-are ; see Preparatiotis, § 9, end (patruo meo est). 

' These English names may be latinized as Edgarut, Edmundus. 



I 1 8 DRILL EXERCISES 

Libri rnagistrorum nostrorum docti sunt. 

Magistris nostris copia librorum est. 

Cum magistris nostris ludis saepe operam damus. 



I often see our schoolmaster during the holidays. Our school- 
master has^ many books about (§ lo) Britain. We boys like to 
see^ the books of our schoolmaster. The schoolmaster's books 
are filled^ with Roman and Greek coins. I am a schoolfellow of 
Mark and Alexander in a famous and ancient school. Not only 
the boys but also the masters of our school pay attention to games. 



§ i6. (Agreement of Adjectives^ 



villa Romana oppidum Romanum 

fagus Britannica 



nummus Romanus 
vir doctus 
liber Latinus 
nauta Romanus 

Rule. — Make the Adjective agree with its Noun in Gender' 
as well as in Number and Case. 

This rule applies not only to examples like those above, in 
which the Adjective is called an Attribute of the Noun, but also 
to examples like the following, in which the Adjective is used with 
the Verb ' to be ' and is called a Predicate Adjective : 
nummus est Romanus. villa est Romana. 
vir est doctus. fagus est Britannica. 



oppidum est 
Romanum. 



^ Say to our schoolmaster there-are ; see Preparations § 9, end. Similarly 
in all future sentences where the verb ' to have ' occurs in this book. 

* Here and in all future sentences where ' like to ' occurs say ' gladly 

' Use creber, and remember the rule for the Case and Number of Adjectives 
used with the verb ' to be ' given on § 13 (' he is free '). 

* For Rules of Gender see Preparations § 15 (p. 75). — Note that the ending 
of the Adjective is not always the same as that of the Noun (as it was in the 
exercises on §g l-ll). 



DRILL EXERCISES 119 

A learned teacher is sometimes not dear to boys. Our teacher 
is learned. Boys are not learned. My aunt is not learned. But 
we boys love our teacher. And my aunt likes to listen when a 
learned man tells about the ancient Britons. There-were^ great 
forests in ancient Britain. . But there-were not many beeches in 
the British forests. So Gaius Julius affirms. There-were many 
wolves and bears in the great forests of ancient Britain. 



§ 17. [Agreement of Adjectives continued^ 

Were the Roman sailors lazy ? Gaius Julius does not blame 
(§ 14) the Roman sailors. He praises^ the courage of his sailors. 
Roman farmers were active, as a Roman poet affirms. There were 
many Roman sailors (say many sailors Rotnari) on the vessels of 
Gaius^ Julius. Roman vessels were-able to sail to Britain and 
round the British coast. The rains of Britain were hideous then,* 
as they are now.* The small pearls of the British ocean were 
mostly (§ 13) dark or blue. 



§ 18. (Past Imperfect Indicative of ' sum' and the ist Conjuga- 
tion.) 

Proximo anno in Cantio eram. 
Proximo anno in Cantio eras. 
Proximo anno in Cantio erat. 
Proximo anno in Cantio eramus. 
Proximo anno in Cantio eratis. 
Proximo anno in Cantio erant. 



' The only forms of the Past Imperfect needed for this and the following 
exercise ar« those which have actually occurred in the text of the story. 
^ Use the verb laudo, ' I piaise ' {Preparations §13). 
' Gaius forms Gen, Gai, Dat. Gaio. 
* Remember that ' then ' and ' now ' are Adverbs. 



120 DRILL EXERCISES 

Multa aedificia antiqua spectabam. 
Multa aedifieia antiqua speciabas. 
Multa aedificia antiqua spectabat. 
Multa aedificia antiqua speciabamus. 
Multa aedificia antiqua spectabatis. . 
Multa aedificia aniiqua spectabant 



The large vessels of British sailors are mostly (§ 13) black ; but 
the little boats are sometimfes white, sometimes blue, sometimes 
yellow. Last year, while (§ 16) I was in Kent, I used-to-see many 
British sailors. They were all sun-burnt. Some^ of the sailors 
used-to-tattoo (say colour) their limbs. The clothes of British 
and French sailors are blue. British sailors mostly have sturdy 
limbs and a great stature. Cur sailors sail round the coasts of all 
lands, as the Roman sailors used-to-sail round the coasts of the 
Mediterranean.* A British sailor does not fear storms. 



§ 19. (^Adjectives and Past Imperfect Indicative continued^ 
Were all the inhabitants of ancient Britain Celts? I think not' 
Some of the ancient inhabitants of our island were not barbarous. 
The inhabitants of Kent were mostly farmers, as they are now.^ 
Many of the inhabitants of Kent were Belgians (§ 15). Were not 
the Belgians a German tribe (§ 18) ? Does not Gaius Julius so 
affirm in his book about the Gallic war ? The German tribes were 
moderately civilized, but the ancient Celts of Britain were not 
civilized. 



^The word for 'some' must stand in the Nominative Case and lie Masculine 
Plural, because ' some of the sailors ' means ' some sailors of the sailors' ; see 
the example in § II of the story, 

'Say 'the Mediterraneaa ocean.' ' Mediterranean' is an AJjective, mean- 
ing ' Mid-land,' and is in Latin Mtditerratieus {a,um). 

'A very common way of saying ' I think nut,' ' I hope not,' and so forth in 
Latin is ' I do not think,' ' I do not hope,' etc 

♦ Remember that ' now ' is an Adverb. 



DRILL EXERCISES 121 

§ 20. [Some uses of the Ablative without a Preposition : see 
summary of these uses at the end of Preparations § 20.) 1 

{A.) In the second century before the birtli of Christ^ Britain 
was free. The boys and girls (§ 15) of the uncivilized Britons 
were free from lessons. The savage (§ 18) Britons together with 
their sons used-to-kili stags and wild-boars in the woods with 
spears and arrows. Tliey used-to-catch (§ 7) wild-beasts with 
hunting dogs (§ 19) for the sake of food. 

(B^ The civilized Britons -used-to-adorn' their limbs with 
golden chains and with precious-stones (§ 19). By means of the 
vessels of the Veneti they used-to-export corn to Gaul. The 
Druids were the teachers of the children of the civilized Britons. 
The Romans used not to fight with chariots. They used-to-fight 
with barbarous tribes for the sake of victory and gain (§ 9). They 
used often to kill their captives ; but sometimes they used to sell 
the captives at a great price (§ 9). 



'Note on the Ablative without a Prbposition. The following 
English Prepositions are to be translated by the Ablative without a Preposition 
in certain cases. 

'From,' when it comes after 'free' (liber, §12) and 'I am free' {vaco, §6). 

'In' or 'At,' when it comes befere a Noun denoting time, as 'in the second 
century,' secundo saeculo (§10), 'at what o'clock?' quota hora'i (§21). Also 
before a Noun denoting price or value, as ' at a great price,' viagno pretio (§9). 

'With,' when it means 'by means of,' or forms a phrase answering the 
question 'how?'; as 'they used to iight with spears and arrows,' hastis el 
sagittis pugnabant (§18), 'they used to fight with great courage,' magna 
audacii pugnabant ; 'hideous with r&vas,' pluviis foedum (§17); 'filled with 
victims,' mctimis -plena (§ 20) ; ' crowded with children,' liberis creber (§ 15). 

' By means of is generally to be translated by the Ablative alone. 

[A fuller account of how to translate English Prepositions is given at the 
end of this book.] 

" Here and in future exercises where the phrase ' before the biith of Christ' 
occurs, say before Christ born. 

' Use the verb omo, I adorn, I ornament. 



122 DRILL EXERCISES 

§ 21. {Some forms of the Future Indicative.y- 

How I shall like^ to walk to the place where the battle was \ 
Where will the place be ? The place will be on the coast of Kent, 
between Dover and Richborough. The road will be long, but it 
will be very-pleasing to us to see the place. You, Mark and 
Alexander, will walk with me and with my uncle to the place. 



§22. {Future Indicative and Imperative of 'sum' and isi 
Cfliijitgation.) 
Locum eras spectabo, si caelum serenum erit. 
Tu, Marce, locum spectabis, si caelum serenum erit. 
Alexander locum spectabit, si caelum serenum erit. 
Universi locum spectabimus, si caelum serenum erit. 
Vos, amita mea et Lydia, locum non spectabitis. 
Amita mea et Lydia locum non spectabunt. 

Specta, Marce! 
Spectate, pueri ! 



If the sky is' clear, we shall-be-able to see the place where the 
Roman vessels were. My uncle will show us* the place. At what 
o'clock shall we arrive ? You, Mark and Alexander, will dine with 
us when it is' evening. We shall carry our lunch with us. The 
cakes and apples will give us* great delight. "Show me* the 
tombs," says Alexander. Alexander is a little boy. " Not too 

'The only forms needed for this exercwe are those which have actually 
occuried in |2i of the story. 

^See note 2 on p. Ii8. 

' Say shall be. The Future Tense often means ' shall ' as well as ' will ' 
in ihe and and 3rd Persons, especially in subordinate clauses. Sometimes 
it means ' will' in the ist Person. 

*What Preposition might be used before the Pronoun in English? Think 
of the meaning. This Preposition after a verb of ' showing ' is translated in 
the same way as after a verb of ' giving.' 



DRILL EXERCISES 1 23 

fast ! (say hurry slowly)," says my uncle. " Give attentioH, boys," 
says my aunt, " we shall dine at the eleventh hour. I shall praise 
(§ 1 3) you, if you arrive^ before the eleventh hour. You will not 
arrive after the eleventh hour, as I hope." "I hope not,"^ says 
my uncle. 

§ 23. (Future Indicative and Imperative continued^ 
We shall start (say give ourselves to the road) at the fifth hour. 
We shall not walk quickly. For Alexander will be tired if we 
walk 2 too (§12) quickly. What o'clock will it be when we 
arrive?' Will you be tired, Alexander, if we arrive' at the tenth 
hour? "I shall not be tired " says Alexander. "You will not 
walk too quickly, as I hope," says my aunt, "for Alexander is a 
little boy." "Not too fast! (say hurry slowly)" says Lydia; 
"Alexander will be hungry before the tenth hour. Carry an 
apple with you, Alexander ! " "I shall not be hungry," says 
Alexander. "Give me the cakes," says my uncle. "Good-bye" 
says my aunt; "arrive 'in-good-time (say opportunely)." 



§ 24. {Perfect Indicative of ' sum ' and ist Conjugation^ 
Practice in all persons of the Singular and Plural the sentence: 
Locum spectavi quo Gaius lulius navigia sua applicavit. 

The sky was clear when we walked to the place where Gaius 
Julius fought with the Britons. In the year 55 B.C.* he built 
vessels in Gaul and sailed from the Gallic coast to the coast of 
Kent. He brought his vessels to land between Dover and Rich- 

' Say shall arrive. 

' See note 3 on p. 12a 

» Use the Future Tense, as in Ex. § 22, p. 122. 

* Say in the fifty -fifth year before Christ born ; and similarly in all future 
sentences when the phrase ' B.C.' or ' A.D.' (Anno Domini) occurs, say before 
Christ bern or after Christ born. 



124 DRILL EXERCISES 

borough, as learned men have generally {mostly, §13) affirmed. The 
Britons were prepared (§21), and they hastened to the place. My 
uncle has often seen the place, but we boys have never been there. 

§ 25. [Pluperfect Indicative of ' sum ' and ist Conjugaiio?i). 
Practice in all persons of the Singular and Plural the sentence : 
Ad locum adventaveram quo Gaius lulius navigia sua applicavit. 



When Gaius Julius anchored^ his vessels near the British 
coast, the Britons had already gathered themselves together on the 
cliffs. "We Britons will never be slaves (§19)" they say (§21). 
They had hastened along the sea-shore and had prepared them- 
selves for battle (§24). Roman forces had never before sailed to 
our island. But Gallic vessels had often sailed to Britain for the 
sake of commerce. Gaius Julius had never before been in Britain. 
But he had waged-war (§ 24) against the inhabitants of the neigh- 
bouring coast. The Gauls (§ 19) had told Gaius Julius' many- 
things about Britain. 



§ 26. {Future Present Indicative of ' sum ' and ist Conjugation.) 
Practice in all persons of the Singular and Plural the sentence : 
Cum alterum pomum gustavero, in viam me dabo. 



"When' shall we- have arrived home*? " says Alexander. " My 
aunt will not praise (§13) us" say I (§21) "if we arrive* late 
(§23)." "We shall have arrived before the eleventh hour," says 

'Where the phrase 'to anchor' oecurs, say 'to fasten to anchors,' as in the 
story. 

^What Preposition might be put in before 'Gaius Julius' in English? 
Compare Ex. 22, note 4 (p. 122). 

' What is the word for ' when ' in a question ? 

* Use the word that properly means ' homewards ' : for the Romans always 
spoke of arriving ' to a place ' (not ' at a place.') 

' Use the Future Perfect Ten-:e (shall have ). 



DRILL EXERCISES I 25 

my uncle, "unless (§25) there-isi rain (§17). If the sky is' clear, 
we shall not arrive late, as I hope." "Unless you, Alexander, 
walk' quickly," says Mark, "there will be delay." "When 
shall we visit Richborough ? " say I. " If you visit 1 me next year 
{proximo anno)," says ray uncle " I will walk with you to Rich- 
borough,2 and I will show vou .the ruins of the castle belonging- 
to-Richborough (§21)." 



After § 26. (<?« Adjectives in -atus, a, um). 

A. Translate and compare the following examples of Ad'-ectives tn 
-atus, -a, -um, which have occurred in the story. 
Aedificiutn consecratum (§10). 
Nonnulla navigia Castella r\ominata sunt (§11). 
Locus in fabula commemoratus est (§ 1 4^. 
Urnae pulchre ornatae (§20). 
Quota hora parati eritis ? (§21). 
Non fatigatus sum (§23). 
Copiae armatae (§ 24). 
Quando satiatus eris? (§26). 

All these Adjectives are formed from Verbs, like the English 
Adjectives in -ed or -n formed from Verbs. Adjectives formed from 
Verbs are generally called ^ Farticiples,' and they may be used, like 
other Adjectives, either to qualify Nouns or with the Verb ' to be' 
(see examples above). When they are used with the Verb ^ to be' they 
form certain tenses of the 'Passive Voice,' as in English. 



' Use the Future Perfect Tense {ihall have — — ). 

■' Imitate the way of saying ' to Dover ' given in § 24 of the story, and see 
also the rule given in Preparations §22. The case used to express 'to' and 
'from' with the name of a Town is the same as if the Prepositions at) and ab 
were used. 



126 DRILL EXERCISES 

B. Translate into Latin. 

I am not satisfied. 

Are you fatigued, Alexander ? 

The um is beautifully adorned. 

I have seen an urn beautifully adorned. 

The Britons were armed with spears and arrows. 

The Britons were prepared for (cf. § 24) battle. 

We wern prepared for lunch. 

The building was already consecrated in the second century. 

The Roman vessels were already fastened to anchors (§ 24) 

The Britons were gathered-together on the sea-shore (§ 25) 



After §26. {On Adjectives in -andus, a, um, and Nouns in 
-anduni)} 

Translate in the way indicated in the Preparations (§§25, 24, 23) 
the folloimng sentences containing Adjectives in -a?idus, a, um : — 

Audacia aquiliferi erat laudanda (laud-able or praise-worthy, 

§25). 

Audacia laudanda aquiliferi Romanes servavit. 

Magister noster est am andus {ami-able or lov-able or worthy-to-he- 
loved). 

Amita mea est amanda. 

Amita mea amanda in Cantio habitat. 

Scopuli Cantii sunt spectandi {Tiuorthy-to-be-secn or simply to-be- 
seen). 

Scopulos spectandos Cantii saepe visitavi. 

Navigia ad scopulos non sunt applicanda {to-be-brought-to- 
land). 



• The uses of the Adjectives in -andus, a, um, and Nouns in -andum will 
be more fully explained hereafter (at the end of the Exercises). 



DRILL EXERCISES I27 

Locus non idoneus est ad navigia applicanda {for vessels to-be- 
brought-to-land, § 24).! 

Locus idoneus erat ad copias explicandas [for forces to-be- 
deployed, §25). 

Translate the following sentences containing Nouns in -andum: — ■ 

Paratus sum ad ambulandum {for walking, §23). 

Parati sumus ad remigandum {cf. remigo, / row). 

Cupidi {desirous) sumus remigaiidi (Gen. Case of 'remigandum.') 

Cupidi eramus visitandi locum ubi proelium erat. 

Cupidus sum ambulandi ad locum. 

Ad locum ambulandi cupidus sum. 



§ 27. {jrd Declension. — Masculines and Feminines that form the 
Nominative Singular without adding -s). 

{A). C. Julius Caesar was a famous {clarus, § 15) general of the 
Romans in the first century B.C. Great was the glory (§4) of C. 
Julius Caesar. The Gauls feared (§ 2 ; say used-io-fear) Caesar. 
For within (§ 22) three years he had defeated (§ 24) the Helvetii^ 
in South Gaul and the Veneli on the Gallic coast and the tribes 
of Belgic Gaul. There-were many Caesars before and after C. 
Julius Caesar. The Romans used-to-name^ the Caesars ' Generals.' 
The forces of the Caesars were great. My uncle has told me 
many-things about the Caesars. 



' Compare in English such sentences as ' It is time for the dinner to be got 
ready,' ' I am eager for the dinner to be got ready,' ' Ring the bell for the 
dinner to be cleared away,' etc 

' HelvetU, the plural of Helvttius, is a noun of the 2nd Declension. The 
Helvetii lived in Helvetia (Switzerland). 

' Use nomino ' I name,' from which comes the Adjective nominatus, a, um 
'named' (§11). 



126 DRILL EXERCISES 

{£). Wh)- did Caesar wage-war against Britain? The cause (§9) 
of the expedition against Britain is known (§16). During the 
war with the Veneti some of the tribes ^ of Britain had supplied 
auxiliaries to^ the Veneti. For the Veneti had been friends of the 
tribes of South Britain during many years. There had also been 
war between the tribes of South Britain. And the Trinobantes 
were friends of the Romans. Accordingly (§ 19) Caesar prepared 
to supply aid to the Trinobantes against the Cassi. 



§ 28. (Same Nouns continued.') 

Caesar's first expedition was not great ; but in the second 
expedition of the next year a great multitude of vessels and five 
legions sailed with Caesar to Britain. How-many' men were-there 
in a Roman legion ? How-many men were-there in five Roman 
legions? The number was different (§19) in different centuries. 
Among* Caesar's forces were also many Gallic auxiliaries. For 
the Belgae and other Gallic tribes had supplied forces to Caesar. 
Many Caesars were warlike. In the first century A.D. one (§22) 
of the Caesars named Claudius was the second conqueror [victor) 
of Britain. I do not love the Caesars ; but C. Julius Caesar was 
a great man and a great general. 



§ 29. {3rd Declension. — Masculines and Femiitines that form 
the Nominative Singular by adding s.) 

A. There had been peace between the Romans and the Britons 
after the first expedition of Caesar. It was not necessary for 
Caesar (§ 24) to wage- war a- second-time against the free tribes of 

'Translate 'tribe' hy natio (instead oi populus) in this and all following 
exercises. 

'The verb ' to supply' is a verb of 'giving.' How, then, is to the Venen 
to be translated ? 

' ' How-many' is quot (indeclinable ; see Latin Drill § 13). 

* Say in tfu number of. 



DRILL EXERCISES 1 29 

Britain. But he was desirous of glory and booty. Accordingly 
in the year 54 B.C. he transported five legions of Roman soldiers 
and a great multitude of Gallic horse-soldiers to our island. The 
soldiers of the Roman legions were foot-soldiers.^ Caesar did not 
feai the tempests^ of the English channel j he did not fear the 
arrows and chariots of the British tribes. From (ex) tlie pluck 
of his soldiers and sailors he expected (§ 26) victory. 

§ 3°- (j'''^ Declension. — Neuters in -men, -us or -ur.y 
Among Caesar's legions was the tenth (§22) legion. The name 
of the tenth legion was ' Alauda.' * The name of the tenth legion 
was famous, and dear to the soldiers. What* was the name of the 

'The word for 'foot-soldier' is pedes (sXexa fedit-), declined like miles and 
eques, \J>ed-it- means properly 'foot -goer,' as egu-it- means 'horse-goer.'] 

' Use tempestas, which also means ' weather ' (Preparations § 29). 

' These Neuters, like the Masculines and Feniinines of §§ 27 and 28, form 
the Nominative Singular without adding an s. The s of words like tempus 
(with an ?■ before the ending of the Gen. Sing.) is not an addition to the stem 
but part of it : between two vowels, however, the s changes to r. 

The Rule of Gender in the 3rd Decl. is therefore : — 

1. Nouns denoting PERSONS are Masculine if they denote MALE 

PERSONS, Feminine if they denote FEMALE PERSONS. (This 
rule is the same for all declensions). 

2. Nouns not denoting persons and forming the Nominative Singular 

by adding an s are mostly Feminine. 
S. Nouns not denoting persons and forming the Nominative Singular 
without adding an s are mostly — 

Feminine If the Nom. Sing, ends in 10, SO or 60 ; 
Neuter if the Nom. Sing, ends in MEN, US, UB, or E; 
Masculine in other cases (for instance when the 
Nom. Sing, ends in OR). 
* A Noun of the 1st Declension, meaning 'the Lark.' 

'Use quid (sec Drill Ex. § 3, p. 106). In asking 'what is the name?' the 
Romans regularly used the Pronoun quid (not the adjectival form of it). 

9 



I JO DRILL EXERCISES 

river where there -was a great contest of the Britons against the 
Romans ? There-are many rivers in South Britain. Caesar does 
not mention! the name of the river. A Roman had three^ names. 
The first names of Caesar were Gaius and Juhus. The chief (§ 1 2) 
name of a Roman was the second name. 



§ 3 1. {Same Nouns continued.) 

{A.) There were many contests of the Britons with the Romans. 
In some of the contests the Britons carried-off the victory. But 
they were not able to stand (§11) against the weight and strength 
of the Roman legions. The bodies of the Britons were big and 
strong, and the Romans were men of small bodies.' But Caesar's 
legions were skilled (§15) in* war. Accordingly they mostly (§13) 
carried off the victory without many wounds. 

{B.) Before the time of C. Julius Caesar Roman vessels had 
never (§25) sailed to our island, unless (§25) for the sake of 
commerce (§19). After the time of C. Julius Caesar another (§24) 
Caesar, by name Claudius, got-logether (§ 28) an expedition against 
Britain. In the times ° of Nero" Agricola defeated (§ 24) the 
Britons and Caledonians. C. Julius Caesar was the first but not 
the chief (§ 12) conqueror of the Britons. 



' Use commemoro, ' I mention,' from which comes the Adjective commemor- 
atiis, a, urn ' mentioned' {§ 14). 

2 The Neuter of ires (§ 27) is iria. 

' For ' men ' use Aomo ; and for ' of small bodies ' say ' with small bodies,' 
as in the last line of § 30 of the story. 

*What Case does the Adjective meaning 'skilled' take in Latin? See 
Preparations § 15 (p. 73). 

'No Preposition in Latin; for 'in the times' denotes time when; cf. p. 69. 

* Nero (stem Neron-) was one of the early Caesars or Emperors of Rome, 
belonging to the Julian family. 



DRILL EXERCISES 131 

§32. {3rd Declension. — Feminines and Masculines in -is, like 
' navis '). 

{A.) Caesar's fleet was large. For there-were not only ships of- 
burden but also ships of-war in the fleet. How-manyi ships sailed 
with Caesar on the second expedition ? The whole (§ 1 6) number 
of the ships was eight-hundred. Six-hundred of (use ex) the ships 
were ships of-burden. The Romans sometimes used-to-name^ ships 
of-burden ' vessels.' ' Vessel ' is a noun (say name) of the second 
declension (use declinatio), but ' ship ' is a noun of the third (§ 23) 
declension. 

{B.) When the enemy' saw Caesar's great fleet, they feared 
(§ 2). But the size of Caesar's ships was small. In the ships of- 
burden were the soldiers and the horses and the arms. Why did 
Caesar sail with ships of-war against the British enemy ?^ The 
Britons had built no ships. But Caesar perhaps (§ 25) did-not- 
know (§31) this.'* He had prepared his second expedition in^ the 
winter of the year 55 B.C. He sailed in^ the summer (§29) of the 
next (§28) year. In ancient times Rome ruled ^ the waves. 



§ 33. [Same Nouns continued.) 

In a Roman ship of-burden not more^ than two-hundred (§32) 
men -were-able to sail. A ship of-burden was not so large as a 
ship of-war. How-many men were-able to sail in Caesar's fleet ? 

^See Ex. §28, Note 3 (p. 128), and Latin Drill, § 13. 

" See Ex. § 27 A, Note 3 (p. 127). 

' Use the Plural (enemies). 

*Use hoc ; see Preparations § 15 (p. 73;. 

°No Preposition in Latin ; for 'in the winter' and 'in the summer' denote 
time when, like ' in the second century ' (Prep. % 10), ' last year ' (§ 16), etc. 

' Say was mistress of. 

' The Singular Number of the word meaning ' more ' {Prep. § 33) is good 
Latin here ; but the Verb ' were-able ' must be Plural, as in the English. 



132 DRILL EXERCISES 

On a Roman ship of-war there-were sometimes high turrets, as 
(§ 1 8) on ships of-the-present-day (§i8). From the high turrets 
the soldiers used to drive-off (§25) the enemy with spears (§ 18). 
An ancient ship of-war had sails and oars. An ancient sliip of-war 
was not armed with iron plates. An ancient ship of-war was not 
so large as a ship of-war of-the-present-day. 



§ 34- {3'"'^ Declension. — Feminines and Masculines whose stems 
end in two consonants^ 

(A.) Cassivellaunus was king of a small part of South Britain 
What^ was the name of the race? In ancient times^ there-were 
many races and many kings in Britain. Many' of the races were 
barbarous. But the races of the Southern (use meridianus, a, um) 
parts were not barbarous. Before the times of Caesar Cassi- 
vellaunus had fought against the-other (§ 19) races of South 
Britain. The name' of the king of the Trinobantes was 
Imanuentius. 

(B.) The boundaries of many British races are not known (§ i6) 
to us. The names of the British kings are mostly (§13) not 
mentioned (§14) in the book of Caesar. Britain was not a part 
of the Roman empire* after the victory of Caesar. After the 
time of Claudius, the fourth (§29) Caesar,^ Britain was under the 
command* of the Caesars. The name of the family {nse gens) of 
C. Julius Caesar was the Julian family. The Romans used-to- 
name the Caesars " Princes " and " Generals." 

'See Ex. §30, note 5 (p. 129). 

2 See Ex. §31, note 5 (p. 130). 

'What Gender? 'Many of the races' means 'many races of the races.' 
For 'of use ex. 

* Use vnperium. 

° In what case must ' the fourth Caesar ' be ? Think of the meaning 
{after the tixti ^ the fourth Caesar). 



DRILL EXERCISES 1 33 

§ 35- {Same Nouns continued.) 

{A.) Some^ of the Southern or maritime races> Df Britain were 
Belgians (§ 15). But the Belgae were of German origin, as Caesar 
tells us in the 'Gallic War.' The chapter is the fourth of the second 
book. Therefore there-were people^ of German origin in Britain 
in the first and second century B.C. The inhabitants of modern 
Britain (say of Britain of-the-present-day) are mostly of German 
origin. But tliey migrated across the German ocean into Britain 
in the fourth and the fifth century after the birth of Christ. 

(^.) Many modern cities are named from (use ex) the Belgian 
(§ 11) races of Kent. The names of the cities are Belgian. But 
the Belgians of Britain used not to build cities, if the testimony 
(§17) of Caesar is true. Winchester (§ 1 5) is the name of an ancient 
city of South Britain. The inhabitants of cities are not barbarous. 
Caesar tells us about British ' towns.' The British ' towns ' were 
different from (§ 19) cities. 



§36. {3rd Declension. — Neuters in -e, like '■mare') 
The British sea separates (§ 34) Britain from Gaul. A part of 
the British sea is named the 'Gallic channel.' Some of the 
Gauls used-to-sail across the British sea to Britain for the sake of 
commerce. London is not many miles distant from the sea. The 
Biitons did not fight against Caesar on the sea, because they had 
never (§25) built ships. British sailors now sail across many seas. 
On many seas and in many lands (§4) you seethe British flag (§ 1 1). 

' What Gender ? ' Some of the races ' means ' some races of the races.' 
For ' of use ex. 

^ Say men, and use homo {Prep. § 30). Homo means ' human being ' and 
includes women ; vir does not include women. The Plural of homo is the only 
word that can be used for ' people ' in the sense of ' persons ' ; for populus 
means 'a people' in the sense of 'a nation' or 'a tribe,' and the Plural 
populi means 'nations' or 'tribes.' 



134 DRILL EXERCISES 

§37. [Recapitulatian of Nouns 0/ 3rd Declension.) 
The British soldiers used-to-fight from (put-of) chariots. Caesar 
had not only foot-soldiers but also horse-soldiers (§ 29). But the 
mobility of the Roman soldiers was not great. Accordingly the 
enemy often used-to-throw-into-confusion the ranks of the Romans. 
In modern times ^ horse-soldiers sometimes carry (§ 6) the arms 
(§ 30) of foot-soldiers. Thus they are able to leap ^ down-from 
(§ 14) their horses and to fight on-foot. The Boers ^ of South 
Africa have horse-soldiers of-this-kind. 



§ 38. [Recapitulation of Nouns of 3rd Declension continued^ 
The boundaries (§34) of the Cassi were across (§35) the river 
Thames. The British leader (§29) used not to fight against the 
Romans in proper (§37) battles. He used to dash suddenly out- 
of the woods and attack the Roman legions. Then he used to 
recall (§31) his horse-soldiers and his chariots. The British leader 
had many thousands (§ 36) of charioteers. Accordingly he some- 
times used-to-carry-off the victory. There-were ten cohorts in a 
Roman legion, and about (§36) five-hundred (§36) men in a 
cohort. Accordingly there- were about five (§26) thousand men 
{%&-j five thousands of men) in a legion. 



§ 39. {Recapitulation of Nouns of 3rd Declension continued.) 

Caesar hastened to the banks of the river Thames. * Where 

was the 'town' of Cassivellaunus ? Caesar does not name the 

town. The town was not a city. It was not strengthened {§30) 

with walls. It was not London. But it was not far from London. 

' See Ex. § 31, Note 5 (p. 130). 

° Say give themselves, as in § 25 of the story. 

•5a«z'f( = Dutch). 

* In what Case must ' Thames ' be ? Think of the meaning. 



DRILL EXERCISES 135 

Perhaps^ it was St. Albans, * as some learned men have affirmed. 
Caesar tells about the town of Cassivellaunus in the fifth book of 
the Gallic War. 



§40. {Recapitulation of Nouns of 3rd Declension continued!) 
Caesar's camp was^ in Kent. There-is also a place in South 
Africa named* Caesar's Camp. The tribes of Kent fought bravely 
for {pn-behalf-ef) their native-land (§4), but the Trinobantes were 
friends of the Romans and enemies of the Cassi. Accordingly the 
unhappy Britons fought in-vain. At-length (§25) many states 
begged peace from (a) Caesar. The conditions of peace were 
hard (say rough, §13). After the peace Caesar sold* a great 
multitude of British captives (§19). Thus many British men and 
women (§20) and children were slaves (§19) of the Romans in the 
first century before the birth of Christ. 



§ 41. (Nouns of 3rd Declension continued^ * 

Thus (§16) Caesar carried-off the victory and imposed a tribute 
upon'^ the inhabitants of South Britain. The Romans carried-off 
the victory because (§1 5) they were skilled (§15) in war. The tenth 
legion was with Caesar in Britain. Caesar loved the tenth legion. 
In the first expedition, while the Romans hesitated (§25) to fight, 



1 For ' perhaps ' see Preparations § 25. 

^ Veruldmium, 

' Remember that the Verb must agree with its Subject {castra). 

* Remember that the Adjective must agree with its Noun. Which is the 
Noun to which the Adjective 'named' belongs? 

' Venum-do, ' I sell,' is a compound of ab, 'I give,' meaning literally ' I 
ofiFer for sale,' and forms its Perfect like do. 

'The Adjectives of the 3rd Declension are deferred till §42. 

' Imitate the construction given in § 40 of the story. 



136 DRILL EXERCISES 

the eagle-bearer of the tenth legion leaped * into the waves and 
carried (§6) the Roman eagle (§ 25) to the land (§4). Accordingly 
the Romans defeated (§24) the Britons on-account-of (§33) the 
pluck of the eagle-bearer. The Roman eagles were made-of-silver 
(§9) and served as ^ flags. 



§ 42. [Adjectives of the 3rd Declension!) 

{A.) The ancient Biitons were brave men. They fought with' 
admirable pluck. The bodies of the ancient Britons were big and 
strong. The Romans were not so (§33) big as the Britons ; but 
by means of the science of war they were able to carry-off 
the victory from the Britons. Caesar was a distinguished general. 
He had defeated the brave tribes of Belgic Gaul in a short time. 
Victory was sweet to Caesar. 

{B.) Not all* the British states (§40) had fought against Caesar. 
There had never (§25) been an alliance (§34) of all the tribes of 
Britain against an enemy. It* is wonderful that (§41) the Britons 
were-able to fight so (§41) successfully against the conquerors of 
so-many (§40) seas and lands. The name of Caesar was dis- 
tinguished through (§26) the whole (§16) world (§41). The soldiers 
of the tenth legion were veterans. It * is sweet to fight and, if it is 
necessary (§24), to die* for (§40) one's'' native-land. 

'See Ex. §37, note 2 (p. 134). 

'Say were instead-of; cf. § 33 of the story {" the skins served as sails.") 

'See Ex. §20, note i (p. 121, on the Ablative without a Preposition). 

•Adjectives meaning 'all/ unlike other Adjectives, generally come before 
their Nouns in Latin : cf. note 2, p. iii, and Rule i of Order, p. loi. 

' No separate word for 'it'; but the Adjective after 'is' must be in the 
Neuter Gender, as in §41 of the stoiy. 

• Say ' to expire,' exspirare. 

' Omit the word ' one's ' in translatii^ 



DRILL EXERCISES 1 37 

§43. {Adjectives of jrd Declension continued.) 

The tribes of Belgic Gaul also were warlike.^ Caesar had 
slaughtered (§20) a huge number of the brave Nervii, fighting^ 
against the Romans. The British auxiliaries had been useful to' 
the Veneti. Accordingly Caesar waged-war against the " arrogant 
Britons.'' And he carriedoff a huge number of British slaves and 
captives. 

"The time is short," says my uncle; "it is necessary (§24) to 
hasten homewards. It* has been pleasant to you, as I hope, to 
see a British ship of-war and to walk to the place where Caesar 
fought with the Britons." We all' approved-of (§41) the opinion 
of my uncle. 



GOD SAVE THE KINtt 



'■ Use ferox, which as thp name of a ship in the Channel squadron is trans- 
lated ' the Furious ' in § 42 of the story. All the names of ships given there 
can be used as Adjectives, but must then not be spelled with capital letters. 

^ ' Fighting' is an Adjective describing the Nervii. In what Case must it, 
then, be? 

• ' Useful to' is like ' dear to ' [^Preparations § 15), 

*See Ex. §42, note 5 (p. 136). 

' Say ' all we-approved.' 



APPENDICES. » 

I. — On Adjectives in -NDUS, A, UM and Nouns 
IN -NDUM. 

The Adjectives in -ndiis, a, um differ from other Adjectives 
only in the following respects : — 

(i) They are all formed from the stems of Verbs. In English, 
too, we have many Adjectives formed from Verbs, and some of 
them are similar in meaning to the Latin Adjectives in -ndus, 
a, um; for instance 'laud-able' (from 'I laud,' Lat. laudo), 
' lov-able ' (in the sense 'worthy to be loved,') 'eat-able' (in the 
sense ' fit to be eaten.') 

(2) They cannot always be translated by Adjectives in English, 
because English generally has no Adjective with exactly the same 
meaning ; so they have often to be translated by a phrase like 
'to-be-loved,' 'to-be-read,' 'to-be-eaten.' Sometimes it is con- 
venient to translate them in other ways. 

The following sentences, taken from the story, should be care- 
fully examined. 

Audacia aquiliferi erat laudanda, ' the courage of the eagle-bearer 



^ These Appendices are not intended to be used by the pupil except as a 
summary and fuller explanation of some of the constructions which have been 
met with in the text. But they are written with a view to the needs of 
beginners, and are thrown into a form which the writer has found to be 
capable of appealing to the minds even of young pupils, if brought before them 
gradually and on seasonable occasions. 



APPENDICES 139 

was laud-able or praise-worthy' (§25). Here the Adjective 
laudanda (feminine of laudandus, to agree with audacia) is 
formed from the Verb laudo, ' I praise,' and it has the same 
meaning as the English Adjective formed with ' -able ' or 
' -worthy ; ' but we may also translate it by ' worthy-to-be 
praised,' or simply 'to-be-praised.' This Adjective, like 
other Adjectives, may be used without the Verb ' to be,' 
and in any Case ; thus we get 

NoM. audacia laudanda, ' laudable courage ' 
Ace. audadam laudandam, ' laudable courage ' 
Gen. audaciae laudandae, ' of laudable courage,' et& 
Hence such a phrase may be mad# to depend on a 
Preposition, as shown in the next sentence. 

Zoius erat idoneus ad navigia applicanda, 'there was a place suitable 
for vessels to-be-brought-to-land ' (24). Here the phrase 
navigia apflicanda, ' vessels to-be-brought-to-land ' depends 
on ad in the sense of ' for.' Compare in English such 
common sentences as ' Ring the bell for the dinner to be 
got ready.' (Latin ad cenam parandam^ 
The Nouns in -ndum differ from other Nouns only in the 
following respects : — 

(i) They are all formed from the stems of Verbs, just as in 
English we may form a Noun out of any Verb by adding '-ing.' 
Thus where in English we speak of ' row-ing,' * walk-ing,' 
' visit-ing,' etc., the Romans used the Nouns remigandum, ambul- 
andum, visitandum, etc. 

(2) They are like Verbs in so far as they take the same con- 
structions as the Verbs from which they are formed. So, too, do 
the English Nouns formed from Verbs ; thus we speak of ' rowing 
quickly,' ' walking slowly ' (with Adverbs, though sometimes also 
with Adjectives), and 'visiting a friend,' ' exploring a country' 
(with Objects depending on the Nouns in ' -ing '). 



I40 APPENDICES 

Labor remigandi magnus erat, ' the labour of rowing was great' 
(§29). Here remigandi is the Genitive Case of the Noun 
remigandum formed from remigo, ' I row.' 

Paratine estis ad atnbulandutn ? 'are you ready for walking ? ' (§23). 
Here ambulandum is the Accusative Case of the Noun 
formed from ambulo, ' I walk,' and depends on a^ meaning 
'for.' 

Cupidiis erat visitandi ei explorandi insulam nostram, ' he was 
desirous of visiting and exploring our island' (§28). Here 
the Genitives of the Nouns visitandwn and explorandum 
take an Ofcject in the Accusative. 

The following sentences, taken from the story, contain further 
examples of the above constructions (Adjectives and Nouns). 

Virtus militum erat magnopere laudanda (§29). Here the 
Adjective is qualified by an Adverb (as other Adjectives 
may be). 

Navigia novis armis ornanda erant (§31). 

Locus idoneus est ad copias explicandas (§25), 

Naves onerariae aptae erant ad onera transportanda (§32). * 

Romani Britannos scientia pugnandi superabant (§30). 

[No example occurs in the story of the Noun in -ndum with est 
denoting 'must' or 'ought.' This is a special use and sense, 
which is best deferred for subsequent study.] 



* Such sentences may also be translated by an entirely different form of 
speech in English ('for deploying forces.') Here 'deploying' is a Notm 
formed fiom the Verb ' deploy.' But this translation leads to confusion with the 
use of the Latin Noun in -ndum, and should therefore be avoided so far as 
possible by beginners. 



APPENDICES 141 

II.— HOW TO TRANSLATE ENGLISH PREPOSITIONS 
INTO LATIN/ 

Where English has a Preposition Latin generally has one also. 

Most of these Latin Prepositions take the Accusative Case, but 

some of them (especially ab or a, cum, de, ex, in when it means 

'in' or 'on,' pro, sub when it means 'under,' and sine) take the 

Ablative : it should be noted that no Latin Prepositions take the 

Dative or the Genitive. But it has been seen that 'of is generally 

expressed by the Genitive alone, and ' to ' very often by the Dative 

alone; also that 'from,' 'at,' 'in,' 'with,' 'by,' and 'by means of 

are sometimes expressed by the Ablative alone. The following 

rules, based upon examples which have occurred in this book, 

will give some guidance as to when the above Prepositions are to 

be translated by Prepositions in Latin and when by a Case without 

any Preposition; but the rules are only an outline, to be filled up by 

future reading, and they deal only with the most important usages. 

OF is generally translated by the Genitive, as in ' the door of 

the country-house,' ianua villae (§1), 'the courage of sailors,' 

audacia nautarum (§2), 'traces of the Romans,' vestigia Roman- 

orum (§9), 'a task of great \zbo\ix,^ opus magni laboris ( = 'very 

laborious,' §31), 'an abundance of plants,' copia plantarum (§ 3), 'a 

great number of coins,' inagnus numerus nummorum (§9).^ 

But (i.) in such phrases as ' some of,' ' many of,' the ' of ' may be 

translated by ex with the Ablative; thus 'some of the 

vessels ' may be translated nonnulla ex navigiis (§ 1 1), 

'many of the tribes,' multi ex populis (§18). 

(ii.) when the phrase ' of ' describes a quality of the 

person or thing spoken of, it is sometimes translated by the 
Ablative without a Preposition ; thus 'men of robust body' 
is homines robusto corpore (§30) : cf. §43, note on p. 99. 

' It may be noted that the ' of in many of these examples does not denote 
possession. 



142 APPENDICES 

TO is generally translated by ad with the Accusative (or some- 
times by in with the Accusative, §ii) when it comes after a verb 
of ' going ' or any verb that denotes motion, such as ' bring ' or 
' carry ' or ' send : ' thus ' I walk to the wood ' is ad silvam ambido 
(§5). But it is sometimes translated by the Accusative w.Jiout a 
Preposition, sometimes by the Dative ; viz. : — 

By the Accusative without a Preposition when it comes before 
the name of a Town : thus ' he brought his vessels to Dover ' is 
navigia Dubras applicavit (§24), 'I walked to London' is 
Londiniunt amhulavi. 

By the Dative in the following cases : 

(i) when it comes after a verb of 'giving'; thus 'it gives 
delight to Lydia,' is Lydiae laetitiam dat (§5), 'they had 
supplied auxiliaries to the Gauls' is Gallis auxilia sub- 
ministraverant (§27). 

(ii) when it comes after the verb 'to be' in the phrase 'there 
is to someone ' = 'someone has ' ; thus ' my uncle has coins' 
is patruo meo nummi stmt (§ 9). 

(iii) when it comes after Adjectives which can take 'to' in 
English, like 'dear,' 'pleasant,' 'useful'; thus 'he is dear 
to us ' is nobis cams est (§15). 

FROM is generally translated by ab or ex with the Ablative ; 
but by the Ablative alone — 

(i) when it comes after certain Verbs and Adjectives with the 
sense of ' free ' ; thus ' he is free from military service ' is 
militia vacat (§ 6), ' free from lessons ' is liber scholis (§ 1 2). 

(ii) when it comes before the name of a Town and after a 
Verb of 'going' or any Verb that denotes motion; thus 
'they will arrive from Dover' is Dubris adventabuni 



APPENDICES 143 

IN or AT^'is generally translated by in with the Ablative; but 
by the Ablative alone — 

(i) when it conies before a Noun denoting time, such as ' day,' 
'month,' 'year,' 'century,' 'hour'; thus 'in the second 
century' is secundo saeculo (§10), 'in the next year' is 
proximo anno (§2'8), 'at what o'clock?' is quota horal (§21). 
(ii) when it comes before a Noun denoting price or value ' : 
thus ' at a great price ' is tnagno fretio (§ 9). 

WITH is translated by cum with the Ablative when it means 
' together with ' or 'in company with ' (as in ' I walk with my 
aunt,' cum amita mea ambulo, § 3, or ' fighting with the Romans,' 
cum Romams pugnantes, §43) ^ ; but by the Ablative alone in 
other senses ; viz : — 

(i) when 'with' means 'by means of;' thus 'they used lo 
fight . with spears and arrows ' is hastis ei sagittis 
pugnabant (§18): here 'spears and arrows' are the 
instruments with which they fought. Similarly when 
'with' comes after Adjectives meaning 'filled'; thus 
'filled with victims' is plenus victimis (^20)^, 'crowded 
with children' is creber pueris et puellis (§15). 

Cii) when the phrase ' with ' answers the question 

' how ? ' ; thus ' they used to fight with great courage ' is 
magna audacia pugnabant. Here ' with great courage ' 
describes the manner in which they fought. 

^ When ' at ' comes before the name of a Town, it is translated by the 
Locative without a Preposition ; but no example of this Case occurs in this 
book. The Locative, however, is the same in form as the Ablative, except in 
the 1st and 2nd Declension, Singular Number. 

^ Sometimes una ' together ' is added, as in ' together with a multitude of 
Gallic auxiliaries, una cum multitudine auxiliorum Gallicorum (§ 28). 

'But just as in English we may say not only 'filled with' but also 'full of' 
so in Latin planus may take the Genitive ; thus ' full of joys ' is fUnus 
gaudiorum (S13). 



144 APPENDICES 

(iii) when the phrase ' with ' answers the question 

' why ? ' thus ' the climate was hideous with rains ' is 
caelum pluv lis foedum erat (§17). Here 'with rains' 
means ' because of rains.' 

(iv) when the phrase 'with ' describes a quality oi\!ciQ 

person or thing spoken of; thus 'a man with a robust 
body' is homo tobusto corpore (§30), 'a boy with blue 
eyes ' is puer oculis caeruleis. 

B Y MEANS OF is sometimes translated h^ per ('through') with 
the Accusative, but generally by the Ablative without a Preposition : 
thus ' they used to fasten their ships by means of iron chains ' is 
naves cateiiis ferreis deligabant (§ 33), ' he hastened to the Thames 
by means of uninterrupted marches ' is continuis itineribus ad 
Tamesam prope7-avit (§ 38). 

^F is sometimes translated by ab or a with the Ablative, but 
generally by the Ablative without a Preposition : thus ' by reason 
( = for the sake) of commerce ' is mercaturae causa (§ i 9), cf. animi 
causa (§20); 'by land and by sea' is terra marique (§43). 

III.— GENERAL RULES OF ORDER. 

Rule i.— Anything that goes with a Noun (excepting a Pre- 
position)is generally put after that Noun in Latin; thus 'villa 
bella' 'villa amitae /iieae.' Except Numeral Adjectives and 
Adjectives meaning 'all,' 'some,' 'many,' 'few.'* 

Rule 2.— Anything that goes with a Verb or an Adjective or 
an Adverb is generally put before that Verb, Adjective or Adverb 
in Latin; thus ' saepe specto,' '7wn specto,' ' scapham specto,' 'in 
scapha navigo ' ; ' non magnus ' ; ' non saepe.' 

* Demonstrative Adjectives (meaning 'this' or 'that') and Interrogative 
Adjectives (meaning 'which?' or 'what?') also precede their Nouns in Latin, 
as in English ; but the Demonstratives do not occur in this book. An Inter- 
rogative occurs in qitota hora ? 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY. 

The words printed in black type are essential words which need to be learned 
by hearts as occuring most often in the text and for the sake of their im- 
portance. 

Words of the third declension have the stem inserted in brackets, except 
where it is the same as the Nom. Sing. (e.^. arbor). To words like navis the 
Gen. Plur. is given. Genders are given where irregular according to the rules 
on p. 75 *"d p. 129 (m.= masculine, f. =feminine, n. = neutet). 

The figures l, 2, 3 denote the declension or conjugation. 



ab or a (with Abl. ), from ; ab 
occidente parte (§ 35), off the 
West side, on the West 

ab-sum, ab-esse, a-fiii, lam distant, 
I am absent 

abundS, i, I abo7ind (Ah\.= in) 

accommodatus, a, um, suited [ac- 
comodated] 

accuso, I, I accuse 

acutus, a, um, sharp [acute] 

ad (with Ace), to; sometimes ^^ 
or at or near (see §§ 15, 23, 24) 

adhuc, hitherto 

admirabilis, 3, adj. , admirable 

ad-sum, ad-esse, ad-fui, / am 
present 

adulescentulus, 2, youn/^ man 

advents, i, I arrive 

adversus, a, um, adverse 

aedificium, 2, building [edifice} 

aedifico, i, I build 

aer (aSr-), 3, m., air 

aeneus, a, um, made of copper 

aes (aer-), 3, n., copper or brass 

aestas (atstat-), 3, summer 

aetas (-tat-), 3, age 

affirmo, i, I affirm, state 

afflicto, I, I wreck [afflict] 

agellus, 2, farm, estate 

agar, agr-um, -i, -6, 2, field 

agger, 3, mound 

agricola, \, farmer 

albiis, a, um, white 



Alexander, Alexandr-um, -I, -0, 2, 

Alexander 
aliquando, some day 
aliquantum, a considerable amount 
alius, alia, aliud, other (Gen. and 

Dat. Sing, irregular) 
alter, altera, allerum, another, a 

second (Gen. and Dat. Sing. 

irregular) 
altus, a, um, high, lofty [alti-tude] 
amabo te, please 
ambulalio (-ion-), 3, walk 
ambulo, i, I walk 
amicilia, I , friendship 
amicus, 2, friend 
amita, i, aunt 
am5, I, I love, like 
amphitheatrum, 2, amphitheatre 
an, or (in a question) 
ancilla, I, viaid-servant 
ancoia, i, anchor 
Anderida silva, the Andredsweald 
Anglicus, a, um, English 
angulus, 2, angle, corner 
animus, 2, mind : animus ingratus, 

ingratitude 
annug, 2, year [annual] 
ante (with Ace), before 
antea (Adverb), before 
antiqnns, a, um, ancient 
Antonius, 2, Antony 
anxius, a, um, anxious 
aper, apr-um, -i, -o, 2, wild boat 



146 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY 



apertus, a, um, open 

applico, I, J bring to land [apply] 

appropinquO, i, I approach 

aptuB, a, um,yf««(/[apt] 

apud (with Ace. )■ >" the house of, 

French che% 
aqua, water, I [aquarium] 
aquila, I, eagle 
aquilifer, 2, eagle-bearer 
ara, I, altar 
arbor, 3, f. , tree 
area, i, open space [area] 
arena, i, sand 

argenteus, a, um, made of silver 
argentum, 2, jzVz'^;' [French 'argent'] 
aries (ariet-), 3, m., ram 
arithmetica, i, arithmetic 



arma, neut. plur., 2, arms, fittings 
armatus, a, um, armed 
armentum, 2, herd 
aro, I, I plough 

arrogans (arrogant-), 3, adj., arro- 
gant 
asper, aspera, asperum, rough 
ater, atra, atrum, dark 
atque, and also, aye and 
audacia, 1, courane, audacity 
aureus, a, um, golden 
ausculto, I, I listen 
autem, however 
anxilium, 2, help, aid 

auxilia (plur.), auxiliaries 
avaritia, I, avarice 



B. 



baca, I, berry 

barbarus, a, um, barbarous 

basilica, I, basilica, church 

beatus, a, um, happy 

Belgae, i, pi., Belgians, a tribe in 
the North of Gaul and also in 
South Britain (Hampshire) 

Belgicus, a, urn, Belgian 

Belgium, 2, Belgium 

bellic5sus, a, um, warlike 



bellO, I, I wage war 
belluin, 2, war 

bellus, a, um, beautiful, jolly, pretty 

[French bel, belle] 
bene, well ; bene ambula, § 23 
bos (bov-), 3, m. or f. , ox 
brevis, 3, adj., brief, short 
Britannia, 1, Britain 
Britannicus, a, um, British 
Britannus, 2, Briton 



0. 



C. = Gaius (Gaium, Gai, Gaio) 
cachinno, i, 1 laugh 
caelum, 2, sky, climate 
caeruleus, a, um, blue 
Caesar, 3, Ctusar 
Caledonia, i, Scotland 
Caledonius, 2, Caledonian 
calor (cal5r-), 3, heat 
Cambria, i, Wales 
campus, ■^, plain 
Cantium, 2, Kent 
canto, I, I sing 
capillus, 2, hair 
caplivus, 2, captive 
captS, I, I catch 



caput (capit-), 3, n., head, chapter 

carina, i, keel 

caruB, a, um, dear 

casa, I, cottage 

Cassi, 2, a tribe in Hertfordshire 

Cassivellaunus, 2, King of the Cassi 

in Hertfordshire 
castanea, i, chestnut-tree 
castellum, 2,, fort [castle] 
castra, neut. pi., 2, camp 
catena, l, chain 
catulus, 2, dog 
causa, I, cause, reason: causa, by 

reason, for the sake 
celeriter, quickly 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY 



147 



Celta, I, Celt 

cena, i, supper, late dinner 

ceno, I, I sup, dine 

certamen (-min-), 3, contest 

certe, at any rate 

cervus, 2, stag 

ceteri, ae, a, the others, the rest 
cetera (n. ) = Eng. 'etcetera ' 

Christus, 2, Christ 

Christianus, a, um, Christian 

cibus, 2, food 

circiter, about 

circum (Preposition with Ace. ; or 
Adverb), around 

circum-do, -dare, -dedl, I surround 

elvitas (-tat-), 3, state [city] 

clades, 3, disaster 

clams, a, um, bright ox famous 

classiaril, ;:, seamen, men of the fleet 

classis (Gen. Pi. clasBiiun), t,, fleet 

cllvus, 2, hill, down 

cohors (cohort-), 3, cohort 

coIlis(Gen. PI. collium), 3, m., hill 

coUoco, I, I place [locate] 

colonia, l, colony 

coloratus, a, um, sun-burnt 
[coloured] 

coloro, I, I colour 

columba, i , dove, pigeon 

commemoro, i, / mention [com- 
memorate] 

commentarii, 2 pi., notes, commen- 
taries 

compare, i, I get together, prepare 

comprobo, i, I approve 

concursio (-ion-), 3, engagement 
[ex-cursion] 

condicio (-ion-), 3, condition 

condiscipulus, 2, schoolfellow 

confirmo, 1, I establish [confirm] 



confusus, a, um, confused 

congregS, i, / gather togethet 
[congregation] 

consecratus, a, um, consecrated 

consobrlna, i, cousin (§ 5) 

consocio, I, I ally 

constantia, i, constancy, firmness 

con-st5, -stare, -stiti, / consist [con, 
together, sto, / stand] : constat 
(3rd person) = « known 

consulto, on purpose [by consulta- 
tion] 

continuus, a, um, continued, un- 
interrupted 

contra (with Ace), against 

copia, I, abundance 

copiam do, I give opportunity 
copiae [plur.), forces 

corium, 2, shin 

corpus (corpor-), 3, body [corpor-al] 

corvus, 2, crow 

creber, crebra, crebrum, crowded 
(Abl. —with"), frequent 

cremo, I, I burn [cremation] 

creo, I, I create 

crucio, I, / ^or/«« [ex-cruciating] 

crustulum, 2, cake 

culpo, I, I blatne 

cultiira, i, tillage, cultivation, cul 
ture 

cum (with Abl.), together with 
with 

cum, %uhen 

cupide, eagerly 

cupidxis, a, nm, desirous, eager 

CHr, why 

cui-a, I, care 

euro, I, / care for, attend to, pro- 
vide (§ 22) 

custos (cuslod-), 3, guard, guardian 



de (with Abl.), about, down from 

debello, I, I defeat 

decimuB, a, um, tenth 

declaro, I, I declare 

declino, I turn aside [decline] 



defeclio (-ion-), 3, defection 
defensor (defensor-), 3, defender 
deleclamentum, 2, delight 
delects, I, I delight 
delibero, l, I deliberate 



148 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY 



deligO, I, I fasten 

ad ancoram deligS, I anchor 
demonstro, i, I point out 
denego, I, I say no [deny] 
densiis, a, nm, dense, thick 
deploro, i, I deplore, lament 
derivatus, a, um, derived 
dg-Bum, de-esse, de-ful, / am 

wanting 
deuB, 2, god 

dexter, dextra, dextrum, right 
dextra, I, right hand 
dico, dicere, dixi, 3, I say 
digitus, 2,yf;/f«r [digit] 
discipulus, 2, pupil [disciple] 
discordia, i, quarrel, discord 
dispute, I, I dispute 
di-sto, I , / am distant 
diu, long, for a long time 
diumus, a, um, of the day 
diversus, a, um, diverse, different (a, 
from) 



do, dare, dedi, / give, set, put (in 

fugam, to flight) 
doctuB, a, um, learned [doctor] 
domesticus, a, um, internal [dom- 
estic] 
domina, I , mistress [dame] 
domus (irregular, f), house, home 

domi, at home 

domum, homewards (home) 
Druidae, I, pi., Druids 
dubito, I, I hesitate, doubt 
Dubrae, I, pi., Dover 
ducenti, ae, a, two hundred 
dulciB, 3, adj., sweet, pleasant 
dum, while 
duo, duae, duo, two 
duodecimus, a, um, twelfth 
duodesexagesimus, a, um, jSlh- 
dux (due-), 3, leader, general 



ecce, behold 

ego,/ 

egregie, excellently 

eqnes (equit-), 3, horse-soldier 

equito, i, I ride 

eqnus, 2, horse 

erro, i, 1 err 

esca, \,food, eating 

esse, to be 

essedarius, 2, charioteer 

essedum, 2, chariot 

et, and: 

et . . . et, both . . . and 
etiam, also, even 
euge, bravo I {e in Pla.utus) 



ex (with Abl. ), out of, from 
excavo, i , / excavate 
exclamo, i, I exclaim 
existimo, i, I consider \fs!uxca.'i&\ 
expeditio (-ion-), 3, expedition 
explico, I, / deploy, arrange 
explore, I, I explore 
exports, I, I export, carry out 
expngnS, i , / storm, take by storm 
exspectatio (-ion-), 3, expectation 
exspecto, i, I expect, await 
ex-Bto, -stare, -stiti, / exist, re- 
main, am extant (§39=rfa«rf 
out) 



F. 



fabrics, I, I manufacture [fabricate] 
fibula, I, play, drama [fable] 
facinus (facinor-), 3, deed, achieve- 
ment 
figus, 2, f., beech 



fanum, 2, shrine 
fatlgatus, a, um, /zVei^ [fatigued] 
femina, I, woman [hence 'femin- 
ine'] 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY 



149 



fenestra, i, window 
fera, i, wild beast 
fere, almost, about 
feriae, I pi., holidays 
farina, I , flesh of wild animals, game 
ferox (feroc-), 3, adj., warlike 
ferratus, a, um, fitted with iron 
ferreus, a, nm, made of iron 
ferus, a, xim, savage 
fefltine, I, I hurry 
fidus, a, -am, faithful 
fijjura, I, figure 
^ilia, I, diUtghter 
fHiUB, 2 (Voc. fill), son 
finis, 3, end ; Plur. fines, m., 
{Gen, finium), boundaries 
firmitudo (tudin-), 1, firmness 
firmo, I, / strengthen [make firm] 
flavus, a, um, yellow 
9o, I, I blow (said of the wind) 
fliimen (-min-), 3, river 
fluvius, 2, river 

Gallia, i, Caul 

Gallicus, a, um, Gallic : fretum 

Gallicum, the English channel 
galllna, i, hen 
Gallus, 2, « Gaul, an inhabitant of 

Gaul 
gallus, 2, cock 
gandium, 2, joy, delight 
gemma, I, gejn, precious stone 
generosus, a, um, nobly born 
gens (gent-), 3, race [gentile] 



G. 



focus, ^, hearth 
foedus, a, um, hideous 
forma, i,form, shape 
formido, i, I fear 
fortasse, perhaps 
fortis, 3, adj., brave, strong 
fortiter, bravely 
fortuna, i, fortune, fate 
Francogallicus, a, um, French 
frenum, 2, bridle 

fretum, 2, channel, arm of the sea 
frugifer, ftugifera, frugiferuni, fruit- 
ful [fruit-bearing] 
fnimentum, 2, corn 
frustra, in vain 
fuga, 1, flight 
fugo, I, 1 put to flight, rout 

fugatus, a, um, routed 
fundamentum, 2, foundation 
funis (Gen. Flur. funium), 3, m., 

rope 



genus (gener-), 3, kind [gener-al] 
Germanicus, a, um, German (adj.) 
Germanus, 2, German (noun) 
gloria, I, glory, fame 
Graeoia, i, Greece 
Graecns, a, um, Greek 
gramineus, a, um, grassy 
grandis, 3, adj., big \gx2a\S\ 
gratns, a, um, pleasing 
guberno, i , / steer, guide [govern] 
gusto, I, I taste 



H. 



habito, I, / dwell', with Ace, / 

inhabit 
liasta, I, spear 
herba, i, grass, herb 
fjibernia, I, Ireland 
liiljernicus, a, um, Irish 
hio, here, at this point 
hiems (Mem-), 3, winter 
Hispania, i, Spain 
historicus, a, um, historical 
hodie, today, at the present day, 

nowadays 



hodiernus, a, um, of the present day 

homo (homin-), 3, vian 

hora, I, hour 

hortus, 2, garden 

hostis (Gen. Plur. hosiiiim), 3, 

enemy 
huiusmodi, of this kind 
humanus, a, um, human, e',vilized 
humo, I, I bury 



ISO 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY 



iam, already^ iioiu, even 

ianua, I, door^ gate 

ibi, there 

idoneus, a, um,_^ttedf suitable 

ieiunus, u, um, hungry 

ientaculum, 2, breakfast 

igitur, therefore, then 

ignavus, a, um, coit'ardly 

ignoro, \, I do not know [ignore] 

ignotus, a, um, unknown 

ille, ilia, illud, yon, that one 

illic, yonder 

illustro, I, / light up [illustrate] 

imber (imbr-), 3, shower of rain 

immigro, I, I immigrate 

imperStor (imperator-), 3, general 

[emperor] 
imperium, 2, «OT?«a«rf [empire] 
impero (with Dat. ), I impose [upon) 
impiger, impigra, impigrum, 

active (not sluggish) 
impigre, actively, bravely 
impius, a, um, unnatural [impious] 
implore, I , / implore 
importo, i , / import, carry in 
impugno, i, I attack 
in (with Abl. ), in or on 

(with Ace), into or onto 
incito, I, I urge, urge on, incite 
inoola, l, inhabitant 
incomaiodum, 2, disaster 
incultus, a, um, uncultivated 



inde, thenct 

infinitus, a, um, infinite 

ingeus (ingent-), 3, adj., huge 

ingratus, a, um, unpleasing, un- 
grateful 

inhumanus, a, um, uncivilized 

inopia, I, want, poverty 

inquam, say I, I say ; inquit, says 
he, he says ; inquimus, we say ; 
inquiunt, they say 

jnsectatio (-ion-), 3, pursuit 

inaignis, 3, adj., distinguished 

in-sto, -stSre, -stiti (with Dat.), 7 
pursue 

insula, i, island 

inter (with Ace), between or during 
or among 

interdum, sometimes 

interea, meanwhile 

interior (interior-), 3, interior, inner 

interrogo, i, I ask, enquire 

intervallum, 2, interval 

intra (with Ace), within 

intro, I, I enter 

irrigo, I, / jfa^ijr [irrigate], §6 

ita, thus 

itaque, accordingly, therefore 

iter (itiner-), 3, n., march 

iterum, a second time 

iudico, I, I judge 

iustus, a, um, just, proper 

iuvat (3rd pers. sing.) it delights 



labor (labor-), 3, labour, toil 
laboro, 1, 1 labour, am in difficulties 
laeiitia, i, delight , pleasure 
lamino, I, plate 
Latiuus, a, nm, Latin 
latus, a, um, wide, broad 
latus (later-), 3, side [later-al] 
laudandus, a, um, laudable 
laudO, I, I praise 
lavO, I, Perf. irregular, I wash 
legatus, 2, lieutenant-general 
Icgie (-ion-), 3, legion 



lenis, 3, adj ., gentle [lenient] 

lente, slowly 

levo, I, / lighten, relieve (§ S) 

libenter, gladly, willingly 

liber, libr-um, -i, -o, 2, book 

liber, libera, liberum,/«« (some- 
times with Abl. =from) 

liberi, 2 pi., children (properly an 
adjective meaning " free ones," 
i.e., children of free-born 
parents) 

Uneus, a, um, made of flax 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY 



«Si 



lingua, I, tongue, language 
linuiJi, 2, flax 

littera, i, Utter (of the alphabet) 
litterarius, a, um, connected with 

letters (litterae), literary 
litus (lilor-), 3, coast 
locus, 2, place (pi. loca, «.), or 

passage of a book (pi. loci, m, ) 
Londinium, 2, London 
longe, far 



longitudo (-tudin-), 3, length [longi- 
tude] 
longua, a, iim, long 
lucrum, 2, gain, profit 
lucus, 2, grove 

ludus,-2, game or elementary school 
luua, I, moon 
lupus, 2, wolf 
luscinia, l, nightingale 
lux (luG-), 3, light 



M. 



machina, i, machine 
magister, 2, schoolmaster, teacher 
magistra, I, school-mistress, teacher 
magnificus, a, um, magnificent 
magnitudo (-tudin-), 3, size, magni- 
tude 
magnopere ( = magno opere), greatly 
maguus, a, um, great, large 
maior (maior-), 3, larger, greater 
mando, I, I commit, entrust 
mane (indeclinable), morning, pro- 
perly in the morning 
mare (declined § 36), 3, sea 
margarita, i, /ear/ [Margaret] 
maritimus, a, um, of the sea, mari- 
time 
materia, i, timber [material] 
mathematicus, a, um, mathematical 
maxirae, chiefly 
me, me 

mecum, with me 
mediocriter, moderately, tolerably 
mediterraneus, a, um, midland, in- 
land: mediterranea, pi., n., 
the midlands 
medius, a, um, mid, middle 
membrum, 2, limb [member] 
meicatiira, I, commerce [merchan- 
dise] 
mergus, 2, sea-guh 
meridianus, a., um, southern [from 
meridies, mid-day'] 



metallum, 2, metal 

meus (Voc. mi), mea, meum, my 

migro, I, I migrate 

mihi, to me^ 

miles (milit-), 3, soldier 

milia, 3, miles, lit. thousands {oj 
paces) 

militia, i, military service 

milito, I, I serve 

ministro, i, /a^/«Krf [minister] 

mirus, a, um, wonderful 

miser, misera, miserum, unhappy, 
?>nserable 

mobilitas (-tat-), 3, mobility 

Mona, I, Isle of Anglesey 

monstrans (monstrant-), 3, adj., 
pointing 

moHstro, I, I show, point 

monumentum, 2, monument 

mora, I, delay 

mortuus, a, um, dead 

mos(mor-), 3, custom 

mox> in due course {soon) 

mullitudo (-tudin-), 3, multitude 

multus, a, um, much: multi, ae, a, 
many; multum (adv.), much, 
very tnuch, very ; multo, by 
much (multo maior, much 
greater, lit. greater by much) 

munilio, 3, bulwark 

murmuro, I, I murmur 

murus, 2, wall 



52 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY 



N. 



nam, for 

narro, i, I tell, narrate 

natiO (-ion-), 3, tribe [nation] 

nato, I, I swim, bathe 

natura, i, nature 

natua, a, um, bom 

ante Christum natum =B. C. 
post Christum natum = A.D. 
nanta, i, sailor 
navigatiO (-ion-), 3, voyage 
nSvigium, 2, vessel, ship 
navigo, i, / iazV [navigate] 
navis (Gen. Plur. nSvium), 3, ship; 

navis longa, ship of war 
-ne marks a question 
nebula, i, cloitd 
neo (or neque) nor, and not 

nee . . . neo, neither . . nor 
necesse, necessary (Dat. =for'\ 
Nervii, a tribe in Belgium 
nidifico, I, I build a nest 
nidus, 2, nest 

niger, nigra, nigrum, black [nigger] 
nihil, fwthing 
nimis, too 

nisi, unless, if . . . not, except 
nobis, to us 

nobiscum, with us 



noctii, by night, in the night-time 
nocturnus, a, um, of the night 
nSmen (-miu-), 3, name [nominal] 
nominatus, a, um, named 
nOmino, i, I name, call 
non, not 

nondum, not yet 

nOn iam, no longer, not any longer 

nonne ( = non -I- ne), not ? 

nonnulli, ae, a, some [non, not, 
nulii, none"] 

nSnuumquam, sometimes (lit. not 
never) 
nonus, a, um, ninth 
nos, we or us, ourselves 
noster, nostra, nostrum, our 
notus, a, um, knoivn 
novus, a, um, new 
nox (noct-), 3, night 
nudo, I, I strip, deprive (Abl. =of) 
nullus, a, um, not any 
nnm, whether, marking a question 
numerus, 2, number 
nummus, 2, coin 
numquam, never 
nunc, now 

nuntio, i, I announce 
nuper, recently, lately, not long ago 



o. 



obscurS, I, I obscure 

obses (obsid-), 3, hostage 

occidens (Occident-), 3, the West 

occults, I, I hide 

occupo, I, I seize [occupy] 

oceanus, 2, ocean 

octingenti, ae, a, eight hundred 

octoginta, eighty 

oculns, 2, eye 

officium, 2, duty 

omnia, Neut. Plur. of omnes, all 

things, everything 
omnlno, altogether 
omnia, 3, adj., every; Plur. omnes, 

m. and f., omnia, n., all 
onerarius, a, um, of burden 



onus (oner-), 3, burden [ex-oner-ate] 
opera, i, attention, study 
oppidum, 2, town 
opportune, in the nick of time 
oppugno, I, I attack 
optime, excellently, hurrah t 
opus (oper-), 3, work [oper-ation] 

opus (with Abl.), need 

quid opus, what need 
ora, I, shore 
orbis, 3, m., circle [orb] ; orbis 

terrarum = the world 
ordo (-din-), 3, m., r<j;«,J [ordin-ary] 
oriens (orient-), 3, the East [pn&alaX] 
origs (origin-), 3, origin 
oriundus, a, um, sprung 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY 



«53 



ornandus, a, Mm, Jit to be equipped- 
ornatus, a, um,- omamented 
orno, I, I equip, ad-orn 



or5, I, I ask, entreat 

ostrea, I, oyster 

ovis (Gen. Plur. ovium), 3, sheep 



pacatus, a, um, subdued, pacified 
palus (palud-), 3, marsh 
paratus, a, \xm, prepared, ready 
paro, I, I prepare, prepare the way 

/<"•(§ 20) 
pars (part), 3, part 
parvus, a, um, small, little 
patria, i, country, fatherland 
patruus, 2, uncle 
pauci. ae, a, few, a few 
pauIuiT), a little 
pax (pac-), 3, peace 
pecunia, i, money 
pedes (pedit-), t„ foot-soldier 
pellis (Gen. Plur. pellium), 3, skin, 

hide 
per (with Ace), through, or during 
pergrandis, 3, adj., very big 
pergratus, a, Mxa, very pleasing 
perlculosus, a, um, perilous, danger- 
ous * 
periculum, 2, peril, danger 
perltus, a, um, skilled (Gs\i.=in) 
perlucidus, a, um, transparent 

[pellucid]' 
perturbs, I, / perturb, disturb, 

throw into confusion 
pes (ped-), 3, m.,fopt; pedibus, on 

foot 
pharus, 2, f., light-house 
piger, pigra, pigrum, lazy, sluggish 
pila, I, ^a//[pill] 
pinus, 2 (partly 4), f. , pine 
piscatorius, a, \xxa, fishing 
plane, utterly, quite 
planta, 1, plant 
planus, a, \XTa,fiat [plane] 
plenuB, a, um, with Gen. full, 

with Abl. filled 
plerumque, mostly, generally 
plumbum, 2, lead 
plus (plur-), more [hence ' Plural '] 
pluvia, I, rain 
poStn, I, poet 



pomum, 2, apple 

pondus (ponder-), 3, weight 

popuhis, 2, tribe [a people] 

porous, 2, pig [yoik'] 

porto, I, I carry 

possum ( = pot-sum), posse ( = pot 
esse), potui, I am able 

post (with Ace), after, behind 

postquam, after ( = when) 

postridle, on the next day 

postnliS, I, I demand 

praecipito, I, / /4«<?-/ [precipitate] 

praecipuus, a, um, especial, par- 
ticular 

praeclarus, a, vm, famous 

praeda, i,prey, booty 

praefectus, 2, officer [prefect] 
praefectus classis, admiral 

praeparo, I, /prepare . 

prae-sto, -stare, -stiti, / perform, 
exhibit 

prae-sum, -esse, -fui (with Dat.), 
I am in command of 

praeterea, besides 

prandium, 2, lumh 

pretium, 2, price 

prim5, at first 

primus, a, wca, first 

princeps (princip-), 3, ptince 

prior (prior-), ■i,, former [prior] 

pro (with Abl.), instead of , for 

procella, I, storm 

proconsul, 3, proconsul, governor 

procul, far 

proelium, 2, battle 

profundus, a, um, deep [profound] 

promunturium, 2, promontory 

prope (with Ace), near 

proper5, i, I hasten 

propinquus, a, um, neighbouring 

propior, propius, nearer 

propositum, 2, proposal 

propter (with Ace), on account of 

propiilso, I, I drive back 



154 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY 



prospere, successfully 

pro sum, -esse, -fui (with Dat.), 

/ am kelpful^ do good 
provolo, I, I dash forth 
proximus, a, um, nearest, next, last 
pruina, 1, frost 
puella, I, girl 
puer, 2, boy 
pngna, i, fight, batllt 



pugnans (pugnant-), 3, zX]., fighting 

pueno, I, I fight 

piuchcr, pnlohra, pulohruiii,^K«, 

beautiful, handsome 
pulchre, beautifully 
puppis (Gen. Plur. puppiutn), 3, 

stem, poop 
puts, I, I fancy, think, suppose 



qnam, how, as, than 

quando, when 

quantopere, how much 

quare (=qua re, by what thing), why 

quartus, a, um, fourth 

quattuor, four 

quattuordecim, fourteen 

quia, because 

quingenli, ae, a., five hun red 

quinquagesimus, a, um, fijtieth 



qoinqae, five 

quintus, a, um, fifth 

quo, whither, to which 

quod, that 

quomodo, how 

quondam, once on a time, formerly 

quoque, too, also, even 

turn quoque, then too, even then 
quota hora est ? what oarlock is it ? 

quota hora, at what o'clock t 



R. 



recreo, i, /refresh (me, myself) 

recte, rightly 

redambulo, I, I walk back 

regalis, 3, adj., royal 

regina, i, gueen 

regulus, 2, ruler, petty king 

reliquiae, I, pi., relics 

reliquus, a, um, the rest, the re- 

7naining 
remigo, i, I row 
remotus, a, um, remote 
remug, 2, oar 
reparo, I, I refit, repair 
reports, i, I carry eff{,ot back) 
reserve, I, I reserve 
revera, really 
revoco, i, I recall 



rex (reg-), 3, king 
Rhenus, 2, the Rhine 
ripa, I, bank 
rjvus, 2, stream [river] 
robur (robor-), 3, oak, strength 
robustus, a, um, robust, sturdy 
Eoma, I, Rome 
ESmanuB, a, um, Roman 
rosa, r, rose, rose-tree 
rostrum, 2, beak, ram 
rola, I, wheel 
ruber, rubra, rubrum, red 
ruinae, i, pi., ruins 
rusticus, a, um, rustic 
Rutupiae, i, pi., Richhorough 
Rutupinus, a, um, belonging to 
Richborough 



Bacer, sacra, sacrum, sacred 

sacra, pi. n., sacred rites 
sacrificS, i, I sacrifice 



8- 



saeculum, 2, century 

saepe, often 

iaevua, a, um, savage, cruel 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABUt-ASY 



ISS 



sagitfa, !, arrow 

aalutO, I, I salute, greet 

satiatus, a, um, satisfied 

eatig, sufficiently, enough 

scapha, i, boat [skiff] 

schola, ij school ; pi. lessons 

scientia, i, science, hiowledge 

scopuluB, 2, cliff, rock 

Scolicus, a, um, Scottish 

scriptilo, I, I write, scribble 

oe, hiviself, themselves : inter se, 

among themselves, with one anot/ier 
secundus, a, vim, second 
sed, but 

sententia, i, opinion 
separo, i, I separate 
septentriones, the North 
Septimus, a, um, seventh 
septingenti, ae, a, seven hundred 
sepulchrum, 2, tomb, sepulchre 
serenus, a, um, clear [serene] 
sero, late 

servo, 1, I save, preserve, watch 
servus, 2, slave 
sescenti, ae, a, six hundred 
si, if 

Bio, so, thus, as follows 
siout, as (lit. so as, just as) 
signum, 2, si^n,flag 
silva, I, wood, forest 
simulacrum, 2, image 
sine (with Abl.), without 
situs, a, um, situated 
sive . . . sive, whether , , » or 
societas (-tat-), 3. alliance-\sode\.y'\ 



B5l, 3, the sun 
solum, 2, soil 
solum, only 
somniS, i, /dream 
sonus, 2, sound 

specto, I, I see, watch, gaze at 
specula, I, watch-tower 
spSro, I, I hope 

splendor (splendor-), 3, splendour 
spumifer, spiimifera, spumiferum, 
foamy [spuma, foam, -fer, 



spurao, I, I foam 

slabililas (-lat-) 3, stability 

Btatio (-ion-) 3, station, roadstead 

slatura, I, height, stature 

Stella, I, star 

Bto, stare, steti, i, I stand 

studiosus, a, um, fotid, studious 

stultitia, I, folly 

sub (with Abl.), under, down in ; 

(with Ace), down into, down 

to, up to 
subito, suddenly 
subministro, i, I supply 
sudis (Gen. Plur. sudium), 3, stake 
sum, esse, fui, I am 
summus, a, um, chief 
super (with Ace. ), over, above 
superior (superior-), 3, previous, 

past ; superior, victorious 
supers, I, I surpass, overcome 
Buus, a, um, his (or his own], their 

(or their own) ; sui, his (or 

their) own men 



taberna, I, inn [tavern] 

tam, so : tam . . quam, so , . a; 

tamen, nevertheless, however 

Tamesa, I, m., Ihames 

tandem, at length 

tantum, so much, or only 

te, thee, you ; tecum, with thee, 

with you 
tegimen (-min-), 3, covering 
tempers, i, I cool, temper 



tempestas (-tat-), 3, tempest, weather 

tempus (tempor-), 3, time [tempor- 
ary] , 

tenebrae, I, Plur., darkness 

terra, i, land 

tertius, a, um, third 

tertius decimus, thirteenth 

testimonium, 2, testimony, evidence 

testudo (-tudin-), 3, tortoise-shell, 
shelter 



'56 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY 



Untinnabulum, 2, bell 
touans (tonant-), 3, adj., thundering 
tormentum, 2, hurling machine 
tot (indeclinable adj.), so many 
tCtuB, a, um (Gen. and Dat. Sing. 

irregular), whole 
tranquillus, a, uin, cahn, tranquil 
trans (with Ace), across 
traneporto, 1, I transport 
trecenti, ae, a, three hundred 
tr6s (ra., f.), tria (n.), three 
tributum, 2, tribute 
Trinobantes, 3, plur., a tribe in 

Essex 



triplex (triplic-), 3, adj., triple 
triquetrus, a, um, triangular 
triumpho, \, I triumph, exult 
tropaeum, 2, trophy 
truoidO, I, I slaughter, murder 
tu, thou, you 

turn, then ( = at that time or there- 
upon) 
tumulus, 2, mound 
turbulentus, a, um, rough, turbulent 
turris (Gen. Plur. turrium), 3, turret 
tutus, a, um, safe 
tuus, a, um, thy, your 



u. 



ubi, where 

ullus, a, um, any (Gen. and Dat. 

Sing, irregular) 
ulmus, 2, f., elm-tree 
umbra, l, shade, shadow 
una, together; una cum, together with 
unda, I, wave 
nnde, whe>ue 
undecimus, a, um, eleventh 
nnivergus, a, um, all together 

[universal] 



unuB, a, um (Gen. and Dat. Sing. 

irregular), one 
urbs (urb-), 3, city [urban] 
urna, i, urn 
ursus, 2, bear 

usilatus, a, um, used, usual, common 
usque ad, right on till 
ut, how or as 
fltilis, 3, adj., useful 



vacca, I, cow 

vaco, I, lamjree [vacant] 

vadum, 2, shallow place, shoal, ford 

validus, a, um, strong 

vallum, J., rampart 

varius, a, um, varied 

vaato, I, I lay waste [de- vast-ate] 

vastus, a, um, wild, waste [vast] 

vehiculum, 2, carriage [vehicle] 

vel, or 

velum, 2, sail; vela dare, to set sail 

velut, as, even as [vel, even ; ut, aj] 

venaticus, a, um, connected with 

hunting 
Veneti, 2, pi., a tribe on the West 

Coast of Gaul 



venia, X, pardon 

Venta Belgaium, i, Winchester 

veutus, 2, wind 

venum-d5, -dare, -dedl, / sell 

[vennm, for sale ; do, I qfer] 
verus, a, um, t)-ue; vera, the truth 

(lit. true things) ; vero, in 

truth, indeed 
vesper, 2, evening or evening star 

[vespers] 
vester, vestra, vestrum, your (of 

several persons) 
vestigium, 2, vestige, trace 
vestimentum, 2,gar>nent [vestment] 
veteranus, a, um, veteran, old 
veto, I, I forbid 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY 



'57 



vex3, I, I annoy, vex 

via, I, road, way; de via, from the 
road; in viam me do, I give 
myself to the road, I start; 
inter viam, on the way 

victito, I, I live 

victor (victor-), 3, victor 

vlctBria, 1, victory 

vicus, 2, village 

viginti (indeclinable), twenty 

villa, I, country-house, villa 

viola, I, violet 

violo, I, I violate 



vir, 2, man 

virtus (virtut-), 3, pluck, couragt 
[virtue] 

visits, I, I visit 

vita, I, life 

vlt5, I, I avoid 

vitrea, 2, pi. n., glass vessels 

vitrum, 2, wood 

vix, scarcely, hardly 
" vobis, to you ; vobiscum, with you 

volito, I, I fly 

vos, you (plural) 

vulniis (viilner), ^, wound [vulner- 
able] 



W. Jolly ^ •S'"'*' Printers. 38 Bridge Street. Aierdein. 



ORA MARITIMA SERIES 

EDITED BY 

Professor E. A. SONNENSCHEIN, D.Litt. 

Published by Messrs. Swan Sonnenschein & Co., Ltd., London, and 
The Macmii-LAN Co., New York. 

Each of the Readers in this series consists of a continuous 
story written in the language to be studied, and so constructed as 
to form the basis of a systematic study of Grammar. They thus 
combine the interest and vitality of a real story with a thorough 
training in the fundamentals of the language concerned. 

The series at present contains the following volumes : — 

ORA MARITIMA: a Latin Story for Be- 

ginners, with Grammar and Exercises. By Professor Son- 
nenschein. (Thirtieth Thousand, crown %vo, price is., subject 
to discount.) 

The scene of the story is laid on the South Coast of England, 
and includes a sketch of the ancient Britorfs and of Caesar's 
invasions of Britain. 

OPINIONS 

"The book is just Ai, clearly right in conception and admirably 
executed." — P. A. Barnett, M.A., H.M. Chief Inspector for the Training 
of Teachers. 

" We have adopted both Ora Maritima and Pro Patria in our Latin 
classes at Manchester Grammar School, and have never had reason to 
regret their adoption. Both books have interest and continuity, and both 
lend themselves excellently to oral practice."— J. L. Paton, M.A., High 
Master of the Manchester Grammar School. 

"The most attractive introduction to Latin that has come under my 
notice, and I have seen most of them in the secondary schools which I 
inspect."— John Kerk, LL.D., late H.M. Chief Inspector of Schools and 
Training Colleges in Scotland. 

" It makes a new departure in the teaching of I^atin that ought to be 
productive of great good. I am in entire sympathy with its method." — 
A. E. ScouGAL, H.M. Senior Chief Inspector of Schools 'n Scotland. 

" I have used Ora Maritima in actual teaching, and have found it both 
interesting and instructive to the pupil." — Professor J- P. POjTGATE, Lilt.D. 

" Ora Maritima proves an ideal book for a first reader." — W. H. D. 
Rouse, Litt.D., Head Master of the Perse School, Cambridge. 



" Exactly what is needed to strike a mean between the wholly conversa- 
tional method, which means no grammar, and the solely grammatical 
method, which means no speech or life." — Sybil F. Partridge, Principal 
of St. Mary's Hall, Liverpool. 

"This is a charming book. We know no better epithet by which to 
describe such an introduction to the Latin tongue. ... It is giving a 
strong recommendation to say, as we gladly do, that our author has given 
us the ideal book which he formerly described. " — Secondary Education 

"We can conceive no more delightful book for the induction of youth 
into the paths of Latin." — The Monthly Register. 

" An interesting experiment, ably carried omU." ^Journal of Education. 

"It aims at teaching a little thoroughly, and it succeeds." — School 
World. 

" An extremely simple and interesting book." — Literary World. 

"The drill exercises are specially to be commended. In the presence 
of the impending campaign against classical education, it behoves its de- 
fenders to furbish up their weapons." — Saturday Review. 

" Ora Maritima does for Latin what the modern oral methods do for 
French and German, i.e., it makes the beginner reaUse that the language 
is really a vehicle of expression, whereby common-sense notions can be 
conveyed. From personal experience I can testify how a few weeks are 
sufficient to gain this all-important idea ; and it is worth adding that in a 
school which I have recently inspecte'd a small boy of eleven employed his 
leisure time in working through Ora Maritima to the end, and then came 
to his master for the sequel Pro Patria. There was no need to tell that 
boy that Latin is something more than a phalanx of declinable nouns and 
verbs." — Alfred Hughes, M.A., Professorof Education in the University 
of Birmingham. 

PRO PATRIA : a Latin Story, being a sequel 

to Ora Maritima, with Grammar and Exercises to the end 
of the Regular Accidence. By Professor Sonnenschein. 
{Tenth Thousand, crown ?>vo, price 2S. 6d., subject to discount.) 

The story includes a sketch of the history of Britain under the 
Romans and Saxons, down to the introduction of Christianity. 
The latter part of the story recounts the history of the Boer War 
down to June, igoo. 

OPINIONS 

" The books are admirable, and under the guidance of a skilful teacher 
their use in class is followed by excellent results.— Professor Michael 
E. Sadler, LL.D., Manchester. 

" I have had both books prescribed for use in our earliest standards. 
They were acknowledged by the Committee which passed them to be 
unequalled for the interesting way in which they presented the subject. 
I think no praise is too high for them."— W. G. Wedderspoon, M.A., 
H.M. Inspector of European Schools and Training Colleges, Burma. 



" I have slartetl my own small boys in Latin with Oiit Marilima and 
Pro Patria, and am delighted with both books : they ii dicate a method 
which is attractive to the' child without being superficial." — Sir Arthur 
IIORT, M.A., Harrow School. 

" In a long experience I have found Pro Patria quite the liest book 
which I have ever come across for arousing and sustaining the interest 
of small boys in their elementary stage of Latin Translation." — The Rev. 
PiiiLir Crick, M.A., St. Ronan's, Worthing. 

THE GREEK WAR OF INDEPEND- 

ENCE. The Story of the War of Independence (1821- 
1827) is told in classical Greek for the use of beginners, with 
Notes and Exercises. By C. D CHAMBERS, M.A. {Crown 
8710, price y- subject to discount,') 

OPINIONS 

" Felicitous in design and able in execution. There is, in our opinion, 
a future for books of this type — books classical in language and m dern 
in subject-matter. As a specimen of Mr. Chambers' skill in reproducing 
the grave Thucydidean style, the acco.unt (;f Byron's arrival in Greece and 
of his too early death is z\Zft\\tx\\..'''' ^Journal of Edttcation. 

" Most ably planned and most successfully executed. It gives reality 
and interest to the early study of Greek." — Educational Times. 

" A nio-t valuable schoolbook. The narrative i< bright and interest- 
ing, and well illustraled with maps and pliniogrjphs. We strongly 
recommend the book to all sclioolmasters."— 1 he Oxford Magazine. 

" The text makes a capital reader." — Guardian. 

JUST PUBLISRED 
AlVI RHEIN : a German Story for Beginners, 

with Grammar and Exercises in Conversation, Free Com- 
position, and Translation. By Professor Karl Wichmann, 
Ph.D. {Crown ivo, p'ice 2J,, subject to discount^ 

The scene of the story is laid in a country parsonage on the 
Rhine ; in the latter part of the book the story of Siegfried and 
the Nibelungen is recounted. 

IjY prefaeatiok 

A FRENCH STORY FOR BEGINNERS, on 

siinilar lines to the above. 



Ora Maritima Series 

Edited by Professor E. A. Sonnenschein, D.Litt. (Oxon). 
Published by Kegan.Paul, French, Trubner & Co., Ltd. 



A great deal of thought has been devoted of recent years to 
the improvement of the methods of teaching languages, and in this 
movement Prof Sonnenschein has played a leading part. Ora 
Maritima achieved an immediate and remarkable success and, 
indeed, created an epoch in the history of elementary Latin books, 
having been taken as a model by many other writers of books for 
beginners. Of the 6th Edition twenty thousand copies were struck 
off, and it will soon be exhausted. The book has been adopted by 
the Syndicate for the local Examinations of the University of Cam- 
bridge as a prescribed subject for the Preliminary Local Examination 
of 191 2 ; and the publishers have received a large number of letters 
expressing approval of the principles and execution of this book 
from teachers who have had personal experience of its use, and from 
no one have they heard anything but good of it. Apart from the 
fact that it provides an interesting story as a basis for the study of 
the elements of grammar, attention is called to the fact that the 
amount of grammatical matter introduced is strictly limited. Sir 
A. F. Hort of Harrow, lays great stress upon this. The story is 
told without going beyond verbs of the ist Conjugation and nouns 
of the ist, 2nd, and 3rd Declensions; and all the grammar that is 
needed for the use of the book is given in the volume, all further 
grammar being left for subsequent courses. The drill exercises 
provide material for viva voce practice on the oral method, and 
also practice in writing simple Latin. 

In view of the fact that some teachers found that the exercises 
in Ora Maritima did not give them all the straightforward practice 
that they desired, a volume of Supplementary Exercises has been 
produced by Miss M. L. Stafford Smith, M.A., containing not only 
a large number of simple sentences for translation into Latin, based 
on the elementary rules of syntax which are illustrated in Ora 
Maritima, but also useful vocabularies of the commonest classical 
words ; and these Exercises have been found very useful, especially 
for slower children. 

The other volumes of the Series are based on corresponding 
principles. Mr. Chambers' Greek War of Independence is the work 



of a scholar who has paid special attention to the style and grammar 
of Thucydides, and his text is scrupulously modelled on the grammar 
and diction of the great Attic historian. The narrative introduces 
the pupil to an important episode of modern history (1821-1827). 

Prof. Wichmann's Am Rhein provides an excellent introduction 
not only to the German language, but also to everyday life in 
modern Germany. It contains a useful vocabulary and abundant 
material for oral work, as well as for written exercises. 

A French " Ora Maritima " has long been a desideratum. In 
the preparation of En Vacances a great deal of labour has been 
devoted during the past three years, and it is hoped that the book 
will prove worthy of a place in the Series. 

The Publishers, Messrs. Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., 
Broadway House, Carter Lane, London, E.C., will be happy to 
send a free copy of any of the volumes in this series to teachers who 
make application for them with a view to their introduction. 

Each of the Readers in the Series consists of a continuous story 
written in the language to be studied, and so constructed as to form 
the basis of a systematic study of Grammar. They thus combine 
the interest and vitality of a real story with a thorough training in 
the fundamentals of the language concerned. 

1. ORA MARITIMA, an illustrated Latin Story for Beginners, 

with Grammar and Exercises on the elements of the regular 
Accidence, by the Editor of the Series. 
Sixth Edition, 1909. Cloth 8vo, price 2/- (subject to discount). 

The scene of the story is laid on the South Coast of England 
and includes a sketch of the ancient Britons and of Csesar's in- 
vasions of Britain. 

2. SUPPLEMENTARY EXERCISES TO ORA MARITIMA, 

by Miss M. L. Stafford Smith, M.A., Head Mistress of 
the Durham High School for Girls. 

Limp Covers, price .i/- (subject to discount). 

3. PRO PATRIA, a Sequel to "Ora Maritima," with Grammar 

and Exercises to the end of the regular Accidence, illustrated 
with pictures and maps, by the Editor of the Series. 
Cloth 8vo, price 2/- (subject to discount). 

The story includes a sketch of the history of Britain under the 
Romans and Saxons, down to the introduction of Christianity. 
The latter part of the story recounts the history of the Boer War 
down to June, 1900. 



4 THE GREEK WAR OF INDEPENDENCE, an illustrated 
Greek Story for Beginners on the same lines as " Ora Maritima" 
and " Pro Patria " with Grammar and Exercises to the end 
of the regular Accidence, illustrated with pictures and maps, 

by C. D. Chambers, M.A. 
A new Edition will be issued immediately. Cloth 8vo, price 
3/- (subject to discount). 

5. AM RHEIN, an illustrated German Story for Beginners, 

by Professor K. Wichmann, Ph.D. 

Second Edition, 1909. Cloth 8vo, price 2/- (subject to discount). 

6. EN VACANCES, an illustrated French Story for Beginners, 

with Grammar and Exercises on the elements of the regular 
Accidence, by M. I. Ebbutt, M.A., Headmistress of Tangle- 
wood School, Barnt Green, and Anatole Le Du, Professeur 
Agr^ge de 1' Universite. 

Cloth 8vo, price 2/- (subject to discount). 

opinions|on;.ora maritima and pro patria. 

" Ora Maritima is just Ai, clearly right in conceotion and admirably 
executed."— P. A. Barnett, H.M. Chief Inspector for the Training of Teachers. 
In his " conimonsense in Education and Teaching," p. 210, Mr. Barnett wrote : 
We must convince our pupils of the reality of the study of Latin by introducing 
thetn cct as early a period as possible to a real book, 

"We have adopted both Ora Maritima and Pro Patria in our Latin classes 
at Manchester Grammar School and have never had reason to regret their 
adoption. Both books have interest and continuity, and both lend themselves 
to oral practice." — ^J. L. Paton, High Master of the Manchester Grammar 
School. 

"Ora Maritima proves an ideal book for a first Reader." — ^W. H. D. RousB, 
Litt.D., Headmaster bf the Perse School, Cambridge. 

" The most attractive introduction to Latin (hat has come under my notice, 
and I have seen most of them in the secondary schools which I inspect." — John 
Kerr, LL.D., Late H.M. Chief Inspector of Schools and Training Colleges in 
ScotUnd. 

" It makes a new departure in the teachinj; of Litin which ou^ht to be pro- 
ductive of great good." — A. E. ScoUGAL, H.M. Senior Chief Inspector of 
Schools in Scotland. • 

" I have had both books prescribed for use in our earliest standards. They 
were acknowledged by the committee which passed them to be unequalled for 
the interesting way in which they present the subject. I think no praise is too 
high for them."— W. G. Wkdderspoo.m, M.A., H.M. Inspector of European 
Schools and Training Colleges, Burma. 

"These books are admirable, and under the guidance of a skilful teacher 
theiruseinschoolsisfoUowedby excellent results."— Prof. M. E. Sadler, LL.D., 
Manchester. 



"I have used Ora Alaritima in actual teaching, and have found it both 
interesting and instructive to the pupil."— Prof. J. P. PosTGATE, Litt.D., 
Liverpool. 

" I have started my own small boys in Latin with Ora Maritima ani Pra 
Patria and am delighted with both books. They indicate a method which is 
attractive to the child without being superficial." — Sir Arthur Hort, M.A., 
Harrow. 

" In a long experience I have found Pro Patria quite the best book which I 
have ever come across for arousing and sustaining the interest of small boys in 
their elementary stage of Latin translation."— The Rev. Philp Crick, M.A., 
St. Ronan's, Worthing. 

" Ora Maritima does for Latin what the modern oral methods do for French 
and German, i.e., it makes the beginner realize that the language is really a 
vehicle of expression, whereby commonsense notions can be conveyed. From 
personal experience I can testify how a few weeks are sufficient to gain this all- 
important idea ; and it is worth adding that in a school which I have recently 
inspected a small boy of eleven employed his leisure time in working through 
Ora Maritima to the end and then came to his master for the sequel, Pro Patria. 
There was no need to tell that boy that Latin is something more than a phalanx 
of declinable nouns and verbs." — Alfred Hughes, M.A., Organizing Professor 
of Education in the University of Birmingham. 

" Ora Maritima is a charming book. We know no better epithet by which 
to describe such an introduction to the Latin tongue. ... It is giving a strong 
recommendation to say, as we gladly do, that our author has given us the ideal 
book which he formerly described." — Secondary Education. 

OPINIONS ON THE GREEK WAR OF INDEPENDENCE. 

" Felicitous in design and able in execution. There is, in our opinion, a 
future for books of this type — books classical in language and modern in subject- 
matter. As a specimen of Mr. Chambers' skill in reproducing the grave 
Thucydidean style, the account of Byron's arrival in Greece and of his too early 
death is excellent." — Journal of Education. 

"Most ably planned and most successfully executed. It gives reality and 
interest to the early study of Greek." — Educational Times. 

"A most valuable schoolbook. The narrative is bright and interesting, and 
well illustrated with maps and photographs. We strongly recommend the book 
to all schoolmasters." — The Oxford Magazine. 

" The text makes a capital reader." — Guardian. 

OPINIONS ON AM RHEIN. 

" Professor Wichmann has conceived and written a pleasant text, fresh with 
interest and free from stodginess. ... A large part of the book ts taken up with 
an account of the adventures of Siegfried, related by Professor Wichmann in 
that simple and graceful narrative style to which both the story and the German 
language lend themselves so well. We think we know the schoolboy's heart, and 
' -The gleams and glooms that dart 
Across the schoolboy's brain ;' 
and we believe that the adventures of Siegfried will commend themselves to 
him." — Modern Language Teaching. 



