^^ ■itma ^crtes 




A MARITIMA 

N STORY B}R BEGINNERS 



EA. SOnNENSCHEIN.D. IJrT. 



mts^AVKammmamaxmnryisza^iT^Ai.immmmmHm 




ORA MARITIMA 



m. -./•!. ■.■•>-'--i- :^.5^'7 




iPresenteJ) to 

of tbe 

Tllniverettp of ZToronto 



\\o^50:ib(>>L ^^ tWWrv 




ORA MARITIMA 



A LATIN STORY FOR BEGINNERS 



WITH GRAMMAR AND EXERCISES 



.^^:v 



d^^ 



ET A; S O N N E N S C H E I N, D. Litt., Oxon. 

Professok ov Latin and Gref.k in thb 
University ok Birmingham 



Natura non facit saltum 



SIXTH 







EDITION 



LONDON 

SVVAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO., LIMD. 

NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 

1909 



f 



PA 

ZD o'0 

I9 0C] 



FILIIS METS TRIBUS 

D. D. 

PATER ET PRAECEPTOR 



The previous cditions of this Book appeared in J/av, 1902; 

November, 1902; November, 1903 ; Aiii^usf, 1905; 

and Jiily, 1906. 



PREFACE 

My apology for adding another to the formidable array of 
elementary Latin manuals is that there is no book in existence 
which satisfies the requirements which I have in mind as of most 
importance for the fruitful study of the language by beginners. 
What I desiderate is : — 

1. A continuous narrative froni beginning to end, capable of 
appealing in respect of its vocabulary and subject matter to the 
minds and interests of young pupils, and free from all those 
syntactical and styhstic difficulties which make even the easiest of 
I/atin authors something of a problem. 

2. A work which shall hold the true balance between too much 
and too Httle in the matter of systematic grammar. In my 
opinion, existing manuals are disfigured by a disproportionate 
amount oilifekss Accidence. The outcome of the traditional system 
is that the pupil learns a multitude of 'La.iin /orms (Cases, Tenses, 
Moods), but very little Latin. That is to say, he acquires a 
bowing acquaintance with all the forms of Nouns and Verbs — 
such as Ablatives in a, e, t\ o, u, ^rd Persons in af, et, it, and so 
forth— before he gets a real hold of the meaning or use of any of 
these forms. But, as Goethe said in a different connexion, "What 
one cannot use is a heavy burden " ; and my experience leads me 
to think that a multitude of forms acts as an encumbrance to the 
pupil at an early stage by distracting his attention from the more 
vital matters of vocabulary, sentence construction, and order of 
words. The real meaning of the Ablative, for instance, can be 
just as well learned from the ist Declension as from all llie 
declensions taken together. And furiher, to run over all the 
declensions without proper understanding of their meanings and 



vl. PREFACE 

uses with and without Prepositions is a real dan:;er, as begetting 
all sorts of misconception and error — so much so that the muddled 
piipil too often never learns the syntax of the Cases at all. No 
doubt all the Declensions and Conjugations must be learned be- 
fore a Latin author is attacked. But when a few of them have 
bcen brought within the pupiFs ken, he finds Hltle difficulty in 
mastering the others in a rapid and more mechanical fashion. In 
the present book I have dealt directly with only three declensions 
of Nouns and Adjectives and the Indicative Active oi sum and of 
the ist Conjugation (incidentally introducing some oftheforms of 
Pronouns, and those forms of the Passive which are made up wilh 
the Verb-adjectives, as in Enghsh) ; but in connexion witli this 
amount of Accidence I have treated very carefully the most 
prominent uses of the Cases with and without Prepositions, and 
the question of the order of words, which I have reduced to a few 
simple rules. It is my hope that teachers who trust themselves to 
my guidance in this book will agree with me in thinking that the 
time spent on such fundamental matters as these is not thrown 
away. The pupil who has mastered this book ought to be able to 
read and write the easiest kind of Latin with some degree of 
fluency and without serious mistakes : in a word, Latin ought to 
have become in some degree a living language to him. 

Above all it is my hope that my Httle story may be read with 
pleasure by those for whom it is meant. The picture which it 
gives of the early Britons is intended to be historically correct, so 
far as it goes ; and the talk about " anchors " and "boats" and 
"hoUdays " will perhaps be acceptable as a substitute for "iustitia," 
" modestia," " temperantia," and the other abstract ideas which 
hover Hke ghosts around the gate of Latin.^ I have kept my 
Vocabulary strictly classical, in spite of the temptation to introduce 



'"The pupil ordinarily approaches Latin and Greek through a cloud o/ 
abstraclions."—\. SlDGWlCK. 



PREFACE vii. 

topics of purely modern interest, such as bicycles : in the later 
sections of the book it is Caesarian. The number of words in the 
vocabulary is relatively large ; but words are necessary if anything 
worth saying is to be said, and a large proportion of my words have 
a close resemblance to the EngUsh words derived from them. Apart 
from this, the acquisition of a working vocabulary is an essential 
part of any real mastery of a language, and it is a task eminently 
within the powers of the youthful mind. 

In regard to the quasi-inductive study of grammar I have 
expressed myself in an article contributed to Mr. Sadler's Special 
Reports^ extracts from which are given below. But I wish it to be 
understood that there is nothing in this book to prevent its being 
used by teachers who prefer the traditional method of teaching the 
Grammar before the sections of the story and the Exercises in 
which it is embodied. All the Grammar required is given in the 
" Preparations " (e.g. pp. 65, 66, 67, 69, etc.) It will be clear 
from these tables and from my " Drill Exercises " that I by no 
means undervalue the importance of systematic training of the 
memory in the early stages of learning. 

In the present edition (lyoS) I have marked t!ie naturally long 
vowels in the text, as in the " Preparations " and the alphalietical 
vocabulary. But 1 have dehberately abstained from burdening 
the memory of pupils and teachers with subtleties of pronunciation, 
such as are involved in the marking of " liidden quantitits " (except 
in such obvious cases as rex, lux, ndndum) : e.g. rexi from rego, 
texi from tego, constat but condit, infert but intulit, Insanus but 
incultus. If a warning is needed against encumbering the teach- 
ing of Latin with difficult questions of t])is kind, it will be found 
emphatically expressed in the recommendations of many of the 
Lehrplane issued by German educational authorities. 

Most of the passages will be found too long for one lesson, 
unless with older pupils. They must be spht up, according to 
circumstances. 



viii. PREFACE 

It is possible that sorne teachers may prefer to use this book 
not as a first book in the strict sense of the term, but rather after 
say a year's work at some other book ; and I can well imagine 
that it might be used to good purpose in this way, for instance as 
a bridge to Caesar, whose invasions of Britain are narrated in out- 
hne in my Chapters VIII.- XIV., or for practice in rapid reading 
side by side with an author. 

My best thanks are due to Lord Avebury for permission to 
reproduce the photographs of Roman and British coins which 
appear in this volume, especially of the coin of Antoninus Pius 
with the figure of Britannia upon it — the prototype of our modern 
penny. 

E. A. S. 

BlRMlNGHAM, 

November, igo8. 



The following passages have struck me since my Preface was 
written as throwing hght on the idea of this book. 

" The real question is not whether we shall go on teaching Latin, 
but what we can do to teach it so as to make learners understand that 
it is not a dead language at allP — Sir F. POLLOCK, in the ' Pilot,' 
Jan. I2th, 1901. 

" We tnust convince our pupils of the reality of the study [Latin] 
by introducing them at as early a period as possible to a real book." — 
P. A. Barnett in " Common Sense in Education and Teaching," 
p. 210. 

" Assimilate the sysiem of teaching the classical languages to that 
which I have shadowed forth for modern language teachingP — 
Professor Mahaffy, Address to Modern Language Association, 
Dec, 1901. 



CONTENTS 



Newer Metiiods in the Teaching of Latin 



Pagb 

1 1 



TEXT. 

I. OrA MARiriMA 



II. — Patruus meus 
III. — Monumenta antiqua 
IV. — Delectamenta puerorum 

V. — Magister noster - 

VI. — Britannia antiqua - 



VII. — Vestigia Romanorum - 



ist Declension, with the 
Present Indicative of 
sum and of the ist 
Conjugation - - 23 

2nd Declension in -us - 26 

2nd Declension in um - 28 

2nd Declension; words 
VOnQ puer - - - 30 

2nd Declension ; words 
Hke magister - -32 

Mixed forms of ist and 
2nd Declension, with 
Past Imperfect Indic- 
ative of sum and of 
the ist Conjugation 
(Active Voice) - - 33 

- The other Tenses of 
the Indicative of 
sum and of the 
ist Conjugation 
(Active Voice) - 38 



CONTENTS 



viii. expeditio prima c. lulii 

Caesaris - 

IX. — Pax violata 

X. — Certamina varia 

XI. — Naves Romanae 

XII. — Gentium Britannicarum 
Societas - 

XIII.— Maria Britannica 

XIV. — Britannia pacata 

XVI. ROBUR et aes triplex 



.^rd Declcnsion- 



Recapitulation of 3; 
Declension - 

Adjectives of ^rd 
Declension - 



PREPARATIONS AND GRAMMAR - 
DRILL EXERCISES ON THE TEXT 

Latin Drill, Conversations, etc, with English 
sentences for rc-translation . . . _ 

APPENDICES 

I. How to translate the Latin Gerundive and Gerund 
II. How to translate the principal Enghsh Prepositions 

LA 1 IN-ENGLISH VOCABULARV 



43 
45 
46 
48 

49 
51 



55 
59 



138 

MS 



NEWER METHODS IN THE 
TEACHING OF LATIN 



We are familiar with the watchwords of two opposed camps on 
the sabject of language-teaching. The old-fashioned view that 
the " declining of nouns and verbs," to use Dr. Johnson's phrase, 
is a necessary prehminary to the reading of any text is nowadays 
met with the continental cry of " Fort mit der Grammatik ! " 
But we are not really compelled to accept either of these harsh 
alternatives, as the more moderate adherents of the new German 
school are now fain to admit. Grammar has its proper place 
in any systematised method of teaching a language ; but that 
place is not at the beginning but rather at the end of each of the 
steps into which a well-graduated course must be divided. 
Speaking of the course as a whole, we may say that the learning 
of grammar should proceed side by side with the reading of a 
text. The old view, which is far from extinct at the present day, 
though it is rarely carried out in all its rigour, was that the pupil 
must learn the rules of the game before he attempts to play it. 
The modern view is that just as in whist or hockey one learns 
the rules by playing the game, so in the study of a language one 
learns the grammar best by the reading of a simple text. But 

* Extracted fmm an article contributed to Mr. Sadler^s Special Reporti. 



12 NEWER METHODS IN THE TEACHING OF LATIN 

it is necessary at once to draw a distinction, which marks the 
difference between the earlier and the more developed form of 
the new method. The mistake made by the first zealots of the 
new school was that they plunged the pupil without pre- 
paration into the reading of what were called " easy passages," — 
passages taken from any ordinary book, and easy perhaps as 
compared with other passages which might have been selected, 
but still bristUng with a multitude of heterogeneous forms 
and constructions. This was an "inductive method " with a 
vengeance ; but it soon became evident that to expect a young 
beginner to work his way through such a jungle to the light of 
clear grammatical consciousness was to expect too much ; * and 
even for the adult beginner the process is slow and laborious. 
For what is the object of grammar unless to make the facts of a 
language accessible and inteUigible by presenting them in a 
simple arrangement ? Here as elsewhere science ought surely to 
step in as an aid, not an obstacle, to understanding. What 
the advocates of the new school failed to see was that 
" nature " cannot dispense with "art"; in other words that the 
text which is to serve as the basis of an inductive study of the 
language must be specially constructed so as to exhibit those 
features on which the teacher desires to lay stress at a particular 
stage of learning. 

What is the ordinary Enghsh practice at the present day? 
On this point others are more competent to speak than I ; but 
I imagine I am not far wrong in saying that the first step in 
learning Latin is to spend a month or two in learning declensions 
and conjugations by rote— not, let us hope, complete with 
their irregularities and exceptions, but in outline. The pupil 



• A distinguished representative of the Neuere Richtung admitted in 
conversation with the present writer some years ago that the teaching of 
French out of his own book was " Ilundesarbeit " (Aorj^-work.) 



NEWER METHODS IN TIIE TEACIIING OF LATIN I3 

then proceeds to the reading and wrlting of easy sentences, 
perhaps in such a book as " Gradatim " ; and after say a 
year or more he will be reading easy selections from a Latin 
author. AU the while he recapitulates his gramuiar and ex- 
tends his grammatical horizon. This is, in any case, an 
immense improvement on the older plan of learning the whole 
of the old Eton Latin Grammar in its Latin dress without 
understanding a word of what is meant by its " as in praesenti " 
and other mysteries. If wisely administered, this method may 
also avoid the error of " Henry's First Latin Book," which 
taught an intolerable deal of Accidence and Syntax to a half- 
pennyworth of text ; though, on the other hand, Henry's First 
Latin Book was an attempt to accompany the learning of 
grammar with the reading of easy sentences from the very 
beginning, and in so far was better than the method we are con- 
sidering. For I must maintain, with all deference to the opinion 
of others whose experience is wider than my own, that we are as 
yet far frotn having drawn the full conclusions of the process of 
reasoning on which we have entered. There should be no pre- 
liminary study of grammar apart from the reading of a text. The 
declensions and conjugations, learncd by rote apart from their apph- 
cations, cannot be properly assimilated or understood, and often 
prove a source of error rather than enh'ghtenment in subsequent 
study. They have to be learned over and over again — always in 
doses which are too large for digestion, and the pupil has mean- 
while been encouraged to form a bad habit of mind. Half know- 
ledge in this case toooften leads to the unedifying spectacle of the 
Sixth Form boy or the University undergraduate who is still so 
shaky in his accidence that he cannot pass his " Smalls " without a 
special effort, though in some respects he may be a good scholar. 
But still more serious is the effect of ihe false conceptions which are 
inevitably implanted in the mind by this method of grammar with- 
out understanding. The pupil learns fneftsd, " by or with a table," 



I.} NEWER METIIODS IN TIIE TEACTIING OF LATIN 

agricold^ " by or with a farmer " — both of them impossible Laiin for 
the English in its natural sense; viensae meaning strictly "to a table" 
is almost impossible in any elementary context. Yct the pupil 
necessarily supposes that in some context or other they must have 
those meanings ; it is often years before he discovers that he has 
been the victim of a practical joke. Some boys never see the fun 
to the bitter end ; in other words, they never learn the syntax of 
the Cases at all. And where are the counterbalancing advantages 
of this method ? The pupil is introduced at an early stage to the 
reading of selections from Latin authors. But what if the interest 
and stimulus of reading consecutive passages could be secured 
without the sacrifice of clearness and grasp which is involved in 
the method of preliminary grammar? The advantages would 
seem in that case to be all on one side. Each new grammatical 
feature of the language would be presented as it is wanled, in an 
interesting context, and would be firmly grasped by the mind ; at 
convenient points the knowledge acquired would be summed up 
in a table (the declension of a noun or the forms of a tense). 
The foundations of granimar would thus be securely laid ; 
there would be no traps for ihe understanding, because each new 
feature would be presented in concrete form, that is in a context 
which explained it. For example, instead o[t?iensd, " by or with a 
table," etc, we should have in niensd, " on a table," cum agrico/d, 
"with a farmer," a/> agricold, " by a farmer" ; ad mensatn, "to a 
table " or sometimes " by {i.e. near) a table ; " agricolae daf, but 
not metisae dat. After one declension had been caught in this 
way, the others would not need so elaborate a treatment. But still 
the old rulc of " festina lente " would warn the teacher not to im- 
pose too great a burden on the young or even the adult beginner ; 
ir i3 no light task to learn simultaneously forms and their 
nieanings, vocabulary, ond the fundamental facts of syntax. It 
must be admitted that the melhod which I am advocating is a slow 
one at first ; but it is sure, and binds fast. The method of pre- 



NEWER METHODS IN THE TEACHING OF LATIN 15 

liminary grammar might be called the railroad method. The 
traveller by rail travels fast, but he sees httle of the country 
through which he is whirled. The longest way round is often the 
shortest way home; and my experience has been that the time 
spent at the start without proceeding beyond the very elenients of 
grammar is time well spent. A fair vocabulary is acquired — 
wiihout effort — in the course of reading ; for the learning of new 
wc.rds, especially if they are chosen so as to present obvious 
similarities to English words, is a task eminently within the 
powers of the youthful mind ; and all words met with in an 
interesting context arouse attention and impress themselves on the 
mind of their own accord. AU the while the pupil is forming his 
feeUng for the language and gradually becoming habituated 
to ordinary ways of saying ordinary things. He gradually loses 
that sense of strangeness which is the great barrier to anything hke 
mastery.* It is surprising how much can be said in Latin without 
using more than a single declension of nouns and adjectives and 
a single conjugation of verbs.f The habit of reading very easy 
Latin, thus acquired at an early stage, will prove of the utmost 
value when the pupil approaches the study of a Latin author. 
Such a book as I have in mind should therefore do something to 
bridge over the formidable chasm which at present separates the 
reading of isolated sentenccs from the reading of an author. 

AU Latin authors as they stand, are far too difficult to 
serve as a basis of study for beginners : and they are also, I 
may add, not well adapted in respect of subject matter and 



*One great advantage of this method, especially for learners who are 
able to cover the ground at a fair rate of progress, is that it lends itself to 
acquiring the "art of reading Latin" (as distinct from the art of consiruing il), 
to use Prof. W. G. Hale's phrase — the art of rapid reading. 

X There are some i,cxx> verbs of the first conjugation in Latin (including 
Compounds), 



l6 NEWER METHODS IN THE TEACHING OF LATIN 

sentiment to appeal to the mind of the very young. Caesar may 
no doubt be made interesting to a boy or girl of twelve by a skilful 
teacher with the aid of maps aiid pictiires. But, after all, the Gallic 
War can never be what it was never meant to be, a child's book. 
The ideal " Reader," which should be the centre of instruction 
during the early stages of a young pupiVs course, should be really 
interesting ; simple and straightforward in regard to its subject 
matter, modern in setting, and as classical as may be in form — a 
book which the pupil may regard with benevolent feehngs, not 
with mere "gloomy respect,"* as worth knowing for its own sake. 
It should be well illustratcd with pictures, diagrams, and maps, 
provided always that the illustrations are to the point, and such as 
are really feU to be needed to explain the text and make it Hve. 
" Modern in setting," for otherwise the book will not appeal to the 
young mind; yet there is much justification for the demand made 
by many adherents of the newer school that the subject matter 
of any school book deahng with a foreign language should be 
closely associated with the history and the manners and customs 
of the people who spoke or speak the language. Possibly the two 
demands are not irreconcilable ; the subject matter may be 
historical and national, but the point of view from which it is 
regarded may be modern. For EngUsh pupils learning Latin the 
reconcihation ought to present Httle difhcuUy ; but nearly every 
great nation of Europe has its points of contact wiih Rome, and 
therefore its opportunities of constructing Latin Readers which are 
national in more senses than one. On the modern side they may 
be patriotic in tone, and inspired by that love of nature wliich 
appeals so dircctly to the youthful mind ; on the ancient side they 
may be historical and instructive in the narrower sense of the 
term. And the illuslrations should also have this two-fold 
character ; they should include subjects both ancient and modem, 

• Lord Rosebery in his Rectorial Address at Glasgow, 1900. 



NEWER METHODS IN THE TEACHING OF LATIN 17 

it being always remembered in regard to the former that their 
object is not to make the boy or girl an archaeologist, but simply 
to act as an aid to the imagination and enable it to reaUse what 
ancient civilisation was like. A good modern fancy sketch may 
often be more instructive from this point of view than a cut taken 
from a dictionary of antiquities. 

The method which I advocate is, therefore, on its linguistic 
side, analogous in some respects to the so-called "natural method " 
or to the method by which an adult, left to his own resources, 
usually attempts to master a foreign tongue. He begins by 
attacking some easy book or newspaper, with the help of a 
dictionary, and he picks up the grammar as he goes along. The 
method is in both cases hetiretic, in so far as the learner does 
not try to reconstruct the language out of the grammar, as 
a palaeontologist reconstructs an extinct animal from a study of a 
few bones. But in the one case the learner works on a text which 
presents all the variety and complexity of nature; in the other, on 
a text which has been simplified and systematised by art, so as to 
lead directly to a clear view of certain fundamental grammatical 
facts. Gianted the premises, I conceive that there will be no great 
difficulty in accepting the conclusion ; for there can hardly be a 
better method of teaching a language than that which combines the 
systematic order of the grammar with the interest and life of the 
story-book. The crux of the situation is to write such a school book; 
and though it may be long before an ideal book of the kind is pro- 
duced, the problem ought not to be impossible of solution, if once 
the necessity ofa solution from the teachingpoint of viewisreahsed. 
On the one hand the ideal book ought to have a sustained interest, 
and if possible to form a continuous narrative from beginning to 
end ; otherwise much of the effect is lost ; this adds materially to 
the difficulty of writing. On the other hand there are various 
considerations which lighten the task. The writer has before him 
an infinite variety of choice in regard to his subject matterj and 



l8 NEWER METIIODS IN TIIE TEACIIING OF LATIN 

though his grammatical order must be systematic, he is under no 
obligation to confine himself absolutely to the narrowest possible 
grammatical field at each step. For example adjectives* may be, 
as they should be on other grounds, treated side by side with the 
substantives which they resemble in form, and the easy forms of 
possum ie.g-t poi-es, pot-esi, pot-erani) side by side with the 
corresponding forms of sum. Here we have material for the 
building of sentences. We may even go further and admit a 
certain number of forms which anticipate future grammatical 
lessons, provided they are not too numerous or of such a character 
as to confuse the grammatical impression which it is the purpose 
in hand to produce. For example, forms hke inquam, inquit 
might be introduced, if necessary, long before the learning of the 
defective verbs was reached ; they would, of course, be accom- 
panied by their translations and treated as isolated words without 
any grammatical explanation. Tact in introducing only such forms 
as are not liable to lead to false inferences is necessary ; and, of 
course, the fewer such anticipations there are the better. A 
certain latitude must also be conceded in regard to idiom and 
style. While it is of importance that the pupil should come across 
nothing which might react disadvantageously on his future com- 
position, it is mere pedantry to insist on any exalted standard of 
literary excellence. The writer who works under the hmitation 
imposed by the conditions of the problem should not attempt any 
high style of diction ; it is sufificient if his Latin is up to the 
standard of such isolated sentences as usually form the mental 
pabulum of the beginner, though it might well be somewhat 
higher. 

I would here anticipate a possible objection. Would not such 
si book be too easy ? Would it provide a suflficient amount of 
mental gymnastic to serve as a means of training the faculties of 

*Including Possessive Adjectives and Parliciples (Verb-adjectives). 



NEWER METHODS IN THE TEACHING OF LATIN 19 

reason and judgment ? That would depend altogether on the aiin 
which the writer set before himself. There is plenty of room 
within the limits of the first declension and the first conjugation 
for the training of the mind in habits of accurate thought and 
expression ; for instance, the sentences may be made as difficult in 
regard to order of words as you please. But I would urge that 
they can hardly be made too easy at the beginniiig. It is some- 
times forgotten that mental training is not synonymous with the 
inculcation of a mass of grammatical forms which only burden the 
memory, and that the habit of reading with care and fluency is it- 
self a mental discipline of the highest value. What the teacher of 
any language has to do is not to accustom his pupil to regard each 
sentence as a nut to crack or a pitfall to beware of ; but rather to 
induce him by the art of "gentle persuasion " to look upon the 
foreign tongue as a friend to be approached on terms of easy 
familiarity. Difficulties will accumulate fast enough, and I snbmit 
with all deference that it is a mistake to convert the learning of 
any foreign langiiage into an obstacle race, by dehberately throwing 
difficulties into the path of the learner. Latin, at any rate, is hard 
enough in itself. And a habit of thoughilcssness is surely the last 
thing that will be encouraged by a meihod such as that sketched 
above, by which learning is made a matter of observation from the 
first, and not of uninteliigent memorizing. 

It goes without saying that the grammar to be taught in such 
a book should be Hmited to the necessary and normal. AIl ihat 
is in any way superfluous to the beginncr should be rigorouily 
excluded. But so soon as a general view of the whole field of 
regular accidence and the bare outUnes of syntax has been attained 
by way of the Reader, the time has arrived for taking the pupil 
over the same ground again, as presented in the systematic form 
of the grammar. He is now in a position to understand what a 
grammar really is — not a collection of arbitrary rules, but a 
catalogue raisonne of the usages of a language based upon 



20 NEWER METHODS IN THE TEACHING OF LATIN 

observation and simplified by science. Successive recapitulations 
should take in more and more of what is abnormal, until a fairly 
comprehensive view of the whole field is obtained. The suggestions 
of whatever new texts are read should, of course, be utilised in 
preparing the mind for irregularities and exceptions ; but it is no 
longer perilous to study the grammar apart. Each course of 
grammar deepens the impression made by those which precede it, 
and at the same time extends the pupil's mental horizon, the 
successive courses being superimposed on one another like a 
number of concentric circles with ever widening diameters. 

I have said nothing about the writing of Latin, because it is 
obvious at the present day that reading should be accompanied by 
writing from the first, and, what is even more important, that the 
sentences to be translated into Latin should be based on ihe 
subject matter and vocabulary of the Reader. Learning a 
language is largely an imitative process, and we must not expect 
our beginners to make bricks \\-ithout straw, any more than we 
expect pupils at a more advanced age to compose in the style of 
Cicero or Livy without giving them plenty of models to 
work upon. It is more important to insist here on the import- 
ance of training the organs of speech and hearing even in 
learning a " dead language " like Latin. For a dead language 
is still a language, and cannot be properly grasped unless it has 
some contact with Uving lip and Hving ear. Let the pupil 
then become accustomed from the first to reading Latin aloud, 
and to reading it with intelligence and expression. It is a 
habit which does not come of itself; but to teach it goes 
a long way towards making the language live again, and acts 
as a most valuable support to the memory. Let anyone try 
learning a httle modern Greek, and he will appreciate the 
difference between remembering the accents by ear and remem 
bering them by the eye alone. So, too, in regard to forms 
and vocabulary. What we have to familiarise our pupils with is 






NEWER METHODS IN THE TEACHING OF LATIN 21 

not merely the look of the word and the phrase and the sentence 
on paper, but still more, the shape of them to the ear. 

From the point of view of the Universily a reform in school 
procedure, both on the literary and on the grammatical side, 
would confer great and lasting benefits. * There must be many 
University teachers who, like the present writer, feel dissatisfied 
with the scrappy and haphazard knowledge of the classics 
commonly presented by students reading for Pass degrees. But 
the foundations must be laid during the long school course, as the 
developed flower must be present in the germ. By not hurrying 
over the initial stages, and by a wise guidance of the later steps, the 
consummation of a worthy classical culture may be reached in the 
end. 

Christmas, 1900. E. A. Sonnknschein. 



* Professor Postgate (Classical Review, February, 1901) demands a 
" thorough revision of the niodes and materials of classical and especially 
elementary classical teaching," adding, " Though we of the Universities have 
a serious grievancc against the schools in that they send us so many mistaught 
on elementary points, and, what is worse, emptied of all desire to learn, we 
must Dot forgct our own deficicDcies. " 



NOTE TO THE SIXTH EDITION. 

In the present issue of this book I have, in de/crence to the 
wishes o/ niany teachers, reiurtied io t/ie principle of marking long 
voivels in the text, which I adopted in mv Parallel Grammar 
Series. As to the method of carrying out the principle I have 
stated my views in the Preface (p. vii). 

/ have also corrected one or two oversights to which I had 
called attention in previous issues {p. iig, l. i, ' sonieti?nes not' 
for ' not always ' ; /. 123, II. 4 and S nf% 23, ' tenthfor seventh '). 
On p. 48, l. j, I have substituted ' multa ex navigiis ' for ' magnus 
nufnerus Jiavigiorum' in order to avoid raising a difficulty of con- 
struction. And there are a few other niinor iniprovements of this 
kind (p. 130, § 31 B ; p. 144 bottom). Biit in all essentials t/ie 
book is unchanged. 

I herezvith express my cordial t/ia?iks to t/iose teac/iers w/io /lave 
pointed out to me misprinis or omissions in t/ie vocabu/aries — in 
particu/ar to Professor Postgaie, Mr. F. E. A. Trayes, Mr. R. S. 
Haydon, Aliss A. F. E. Sanders. T/iese oversig/its — fiot very 
many in number — have a// been corrected in t/ie present issue. 

May I ca/l the attention oj ieac/iers to the mistake, into which 
pupils easi/y fal/, of pronouncing t/ie word ' Alaritinia ' /ike t/ie 
Frenc/i ' marititne ' wi(/i t/ie accent o?i the syi/abie ti-^ i?istead 0/ 
Maritii?ia ? 



ORA MARITIMA 

VFiL 

COMMENTARII DE VITA MEA AD 

DUBRAS ANNO MDCCCXCIX 




DkA MaKITIMA INTIiR DlMlRAS II 1 Rl)l L' l'I AS. 

I. Ora maritima. 

[First Declcnsion of -Nouns and Afljeclivcs, togeih r wilh llie Picsent 
Intlicative oi siiin and of ihe First Conjugation.] 

1. Quam bella est dra iiiaritinia ! Non procul 
ab ora niaritima cst \illa. In \illa amita mca 
habitat ; ct ego cum amitfi mcfi nunc hal)ito. Ante 
ianuam villae est area. In area est castanca, ubi 



24 



ORA MARITIMA 



luscinia inteiduni canlat. Sub umbra castaneae ancilla 
interdum cenam parat. Amo oram maritimam ; amo 
villam bellam. 

2. Feriae nunc sunt. Inter ferias in villa 
maritima habito. O beatas ferias ! In arena orae 
maritimae sunt ancorae et catenae. Nam incolae 
5rae maritimae sunt nautae. Magna est audacia 
nautarum : procellas non formldant. Nautas amo, ut 
nautae me amant. Cum nautls interdum in scaphls 
navigo. 



(T 



=\ 



\ 



w 



k 

rf 



■< /^ 




Anxora et Catena— Scaimia. 



3. Ex fenestris villae undas spectas. Undas 
caeruleas amo. Quam magnae sunt, quam perlucidae ! 



ORA MAKITIMA 2$ 

Post cenam lunain et stellas ex fenestra mea specto. 
Prope villam est silva, ubi cum amita mea saepe 
ambulo. Quantopere nos silva delectat ! O copiam 
plantarum et herbarum ! O copiam bacarum ! Non 
solum nautae sed etiam agricolae circum habitant. 
Casae agricolarum parvae sunt. Xautae casas albas 
habitant. Amita mea casas agricolarum et nautarum 
saepe vlsitat. 

4. Victoria est reglna mea. Magna est gloria 
Victoriae Reginae, non solum in insulls Britannicls 
sed etiam in India, in Canada, in AustraHa, in Africa, 
ubi coloniae Britannicae sunt. Reglna est domina 
muitarum terrarum. Britannia est domina undarum. 
In gloria reglnae meae triumpho. Te, Britannia, 
amo : v5s, insulae Britannicae, amo. Sed Britannia 
non est patria niea. Ex Africa Merldiana sum. 

5. Lydia quoque, consobrlna mea, apud amitam 
meam nunc habitat. Lydia columbas curat : cura 
columbarum Lydiae magnam laetitiam dat. Tu, 
Lydia, cum apud magistram tuam es, linguae Franco- 
gallicae et linguae Anglicae operam das ; sed ego 
linguls antiquls Romae et Graeciae operam do. Saepe 
cum Lydia ad silvam vel ad oram maritimam ambulo. 
Interdum cum nauta in scapha navigamus. Ouant- 
opere nos undae caeruleae delectant ! Lydia casas 
agricolarum cum amita mea interdum vlsitat. Vos, 
flHae agricolarum, Lydiam amatis, ut Lydia vos amat. 
Ubi inopia est, ibi amita mea inopiam levat. 



26 ORA MARITIMA 

IL Patruus meus. 

[Second Declension ; Nouns and Adjectives in us]. 

6. Patruus meus quondam praefectus erat in 
Africa Merldiana. Nunc mllitia vacat, et agello suo 
operam dat. Agellus patrul mel non magnus est. 
Circum villam est hortus. Murus hortl non altus est. 
Rlvus est prope hortum, unde aquam portamus, cum 
hortum irrigamus. In horto magnus est numerus 
rosarum et violarum. Rosae et violae tibi, mi patrue, 
magnam laetitiam dant. Tu, Lydia, cum patruo meo 
in hortd saepe ambulas. 

7. In angulo hortl sunt uhnl. In uhiils corvl 
nldificant. Corvos hbenter specto, cum circum nldos 
su5s voHtant. Magnus est numerus corvorum in 
horto patrul mel ; muhl mergi super oceanum voHtant. 
Vos, mergl, Hbenter spect5, cum super oceanum 
voiitatis et praedam captatis. Oceanus mergls cibum 
dat. Patruum meumhortus et agehus suus deleciant ; 
in ageHS sunt equl et vaccae et porcl et gaUl gahlnae- 
que. Lydia gah^s gaHlnasciue curat. Non procul 
ab agell5 est vlcus, ubi rusticl habitant. N5nnulll ex 
rusticls agellum cum equls et vaccls et porcls 
curant, 

8. Ex hort5 patrul mel scopul5s alb5s 5rae 
maritimae spectamus. Scopull sunt altl. ¥a 5ra 
Francogallica n5n procul abest. -Noctu ex scoi^ulls 
phar5s 5rae Lrancogallicae spectamus, velut stellas 
claras in ocean5. Quam bellus es, 5ceane, cum luna 



ORA MARITIMA 



27 



undas tuas illustrat ! Quantopere me delectat vos, 
undae caeruleae, spectare, cum tranquillae estis et 
arcnam orae maritimae lavatis ! Quantopere me 
delectatis cum turbulentae estis et sub scopulis 
spumatis et murmuratis ! 







!h^- .v-...'/.M:r^"^:^ 



VlLLA MaRITIMA. 

Ulmi kt Corvi. Murus. Ianua. Rivus, Castanea. Mergi. 



28 



ORA MARITIMA 



III. Monumenta antiqua. 

[Nouns and Adjectives in tun']. 

9. Agellus patrul mel in Cantio est, inter 
Dubras et Rutupias situs. Dubrae et Rutupiae 
oppida antlqua sunt. Multa sunt monumenta antlqua 
in Britannia, multa vestlgia R5man5rum. Reliquiae 
villarum, oppid5rum, amphitheatr5rum R5man5rum 
hodie exstant. Multae viae R5manae in Britannia 
sunt. In Canti5 est via R5mana inter Rutupias et 
Londinium. JSolum Britannicum multos numm5s 
aureSs, arg-ente5s, aene5s et Britann5rum et R5man- 
orum occultat. Rusticls numml saepe sunt causa lucrl, 







NUMMUS ROMANUS CUM FlGURA BrITANNIAE. 




nummds romanus. 
(C.Idl.Caesar.) (Augustus.) 



ORA MARITIMA 



29 




NuMNfos Eritannicus. 




NuMMUS Britaxnicus. 



cum arant vel fundamenta aedificidrum antTqu5rum 
exxavant. Nam nummos antlquos magno preti5 
venumdant. Patru5 me5 magnus numerus est numm- 
5rum R5man5rum. 

10. Inter ferias commentari5s me5s de vlta 
mca scriptit5. Dubras saepe vlsitamus ; nam oppidum 
non procul abest. Super oppidum est castellum mag- 
num ; in castell5 est specula antlqua. Murl speculae 
altl et latl sunt. Quondam erat pharus R5man5rum. 
Prope speculam est aedificium consecratum. lam 
secund5 saccul5 post Christum natum basilica Chris- 
tiana erai. 

11. Castellum in pr5munturi5 5rae maritimae 
stat. Post castellum sunt c]lvl graminel et latl. Ex 
castell5 fretum Gallicurn spectas. Ante ocul5s sunt 



30 



ORA MARITIMA 



vela alba multorum navigiorum ; navigia sunt Brit- 
annica, Francogallica, Germanica, Belgica. Nonnulla 
ex navigils BritannicTs "castella" nominata sunt. 
Littera C in signo est. " Castella " in Africam Merldi- 
anam navigant, ubi patria rnea est. 




.8jSg»i{*irafl» ma3^isy t: 



CA^rELI.UM AD DUBRAS SITUM. 

IV. Delectamenta puerorum. 

[Nouns and Adjectives like piie?-\ 

12. In numero amlcorum meorum sunt duo 
pucrT. Marcus, puer quattuordccim annorum, mihi 



ORA MARITIMA 31 

praccipuus amicus est. Propc Dubras nunc habitant, 
sed ex Caledonia oriundl sunt. Nobls puerls feriae 
nunc sunt ; nam condiscipull sumus. Inter ferias 
liberl sumus scholls. Amfcl mel me saepe vlsitant, et 
ego amlcos meos vlsito. Magna est inter nos amlcitia. 
Una ambulamus, una in undls spiimiferls natamus, 
cum non nimis asperae sunt. Ouantopere nos pueros 
ludl pilarum in arena delectant ! Ut iuvat castella 
contra undas spumiferas acdificare ! 

13. Nobls puerls feriae plenae sunt gaudiorum 
a mane usque ad vesperum. Nonnumquam in scapha 
cum Petro navigamus. Perrus est adulescentulus 
vlginti annorum. Petrl scapha non s5lum remls sed 
etiam vells apta est. Plerumque remigamus, sed 
ndnnumquam vcla damus, cum ventus non nimis 
asper est. Petrus scapham gubernat et vells minis- 
trat. Nos puerl scapham bellam laudamus et amamus. 

14. Non procul a Dubrls est scopulus altus, 
unde 5ceanum et navigia et 5ram maritimam spectas. 
Locus in fabula commemoratus est, ubi Leir, regulus 
Britann5rum antiqu5rum, fortunam suam miseram 
depl5rat, stultitiam suam culpat, fllias suas animl 
ingrati acciisat. O fortunam asperam ! O fllias 
impias ! O constantiam Cordcliae ! Scopulus ex 
poeta n5minatus est. Nam in fabula est locus ubi 
vir gener5sus, amlcus fldus regull, de scopul5 se 
praecipitare parat ; scd fllius suus virum ex perlculo 
servat. Fllium fldum laud5et am5. N5s puerl locum 
saepe vlsitamus. 



32 



ORA MARITIMA 



(^ 



=^ 




SCOPULUS AltUS At) DUBRAS SITUS, EX POETA NOMIXATUS. 

V. Magister noster. 

[Nouns and Adjectives like inagister\ 

15. Magister noster vir doctus est, sed lud5rum 

peritus. Nobls puerls carus est. Inter ferias patruum 

meum interdum vlsitat. Dextra magistrl nostrl valida 

est, et puerl pigrl nec dextram nec magistrum amant. 

" Non amo te, Sabidl, nec possum dlcere quare. 

Hoc tantum possum dlccrc : non amo te." 
Magistrum non amant quia libros Graecos et 
Latlnos non amant. Nam discipull scholae nostrae 
linguls antlquls operam dant, atque scientils mathe- 



ORA MARITIMA 33 

maticls. Magistro nostro magna copia est librorum 
pulchrorum. Schola nostra antlqua et clara est : non 
solum librls sed etiam ludls operam damus. Schola 
nostra non in Cantio est. In vlco nostro est ludus 
litterarius, crC-bcr puerls et puellis, llberls agricolarum, 
Sed ego cum i\Iarc6 et Alexandro, amlcls mels, ad 
\'cntam Bclgarum discipulus sum. 

VI. Britannia antiqua. 

[Mixed forms of Nouns an 1 Adjectives of the isf and 2nd Declensions, 
logether with the Past loipcrfect Indicaiive of suin anJ of the 
ist Conjugation.] 

IG. Magister noster librorum historicorum 
studiosus est ; dc patria nostra antlqua libenter narrat. 
Proximo anno, dum apud nos erat,de vlta Britannorum 
antlquorum saepe narrabat. Patruus meus et amita 
mea libenter auscultabant ; ego quoque nonnumquam 
aderam. Slc narrabat : — 

" Fere tota Britannia quondam silvls densls crebra 
erat. Inter 5ram maritimam et fluvium Tamesam, 
ubi nunc agrl frugiferl sunt, silva erat Anderida, locus 
vastus et incultus. Silvae plenae erant ferarum — 
.„porum, ursdrum, cervorum, aprorum. Multa et varia 
...ateria erat in silvls Britannicls : sed fagus Britannls 
antlquls n5n erat n5ta, sl Gaius luHus vera affirmat. 
Et plnus Sc5tica dcerat." 

17. " Solum, ubi llberum erat silvls, frugiferum 
erat. Metallls quoque multls abundabat — plumbo aibo 




Br1TAN.nI A.NTKJUJ 



ORA MARITIMA 35 

et ferro, atque, ut Tacitvis affirmat, auro argentoque, 
Margarltas et ostreas dabat oceanus : niarg-arltae 
parvae erant, sed ostreae magnae et praeclarae, 
Caelum tum quoque crebrls pluvils et nebulls atrls 
foedum erat ; sed prulnae asperae aberant, NatQra 
oceanl ' pigra ' erat, sl tcstimonium Tacitl verum est : 
nautae Romanl, inc^uit, in aqua pigra vix poterant 
remigare. Sed verunme est testimonium ? An natura 
nautfirum Romandrum non satis impigra erat ,'' " 

18. " Incolae antlqul insulae nostrae ferl et 
bellicSsI erant. Hastls, sagittls, essedls inter se 
pugnabant. Proelia Britannos antlquos delectabant, 
Multl et dlversl erant populi Britannorum, Multl 
ex populls erant Celtae. Celtls antlquls, slcut Ger- 
manls, capilli flavi, ocull caerulei, membra magna 
et robusta erant. SlcTacitus de Caledoniis narrat, 
Incolae Cambriae meridianae ' coloratl ' erant, Sed 
Romanls statura parva, oculi et capilli nigri erant, 
Universi Britanni, ut Gaius lulius affirmat, membra 
vitro colorabant, sicut nautae nostrl hodiernl. Vestl- 
menta ex corils ferarum constabant, In casis parvls 
circum silvas suas habitabant." 

19. Ilic amita mea " Nonne in oppidls habit- 
abant ^ " inquit, Et ille " Oppida aedificabant," inquit 
"sed, si Gaius IQHus vcra affirmat, oppida Britann- 
orum antiquorum loca firmata erant, non loca uhi 
habitabant. Sed Britannia merldiana crebra erat 
incohs et acdificiis. Slc narrat Cacsar in libro quinto 
Belh GaHicI. Mukl una hal:)itribant, ut puto." " Itaque 
non planc barbarl erant," inquit amita mea, \Fa 



56 



Or.A ISIARITBIA 



ille : " Incolae Cantil agn culturae operam dabant, 
atque etiam mercaturae. Nam Venetl ex Gallia. in 
Britanniam mercaturae causa navigabant. Britann! 
frumentum, armenta, aurum, argentum, ferrum, coria, 
catul5s venaticos, servos et captlvos expoitabant ; 
frena, vitrea, gemmas, cetera importabant. Itaque 
mediocriter hijmanl erant,nec multum dlversl a Gallls.' 




URNAE ET CATKNAIi: Britannicae. 




Druiuai: liKHA.NMci. 



38 oi;a jmauiti.ma 

20. " Multl mortuos cremabant, slcut Graecl et 
Romanl : exstant in Cantio sepulchra cum urnls 
pulchre ornatls. Exstant etiam numml Britannicl, 
aurel, argentel, aenel. Esseda quoque fabricabant : 
non plane inhumanl erant, sl rotas ferratas essed- 
orum et nummos aureos aeneosque fabricare poterant. 
Britannls antlquls magnus numerus gallorum gallln- 
arumque erat ; animl, non escae, causa curabant, ut 
Gaius luHus afifirmat. Scd incolae mediterraneorum 
et Caledonil ferl et barbari erant. Mortuos humabant. 
Agrl culturae operam non dabant ; n5n frumento sed 
ferlna victitabant. Dc5rum fana in lucls sacrls et silvls 
atrls erant. Sacra ciirabant Druidae. Sacra erant 
saeva: vir5s, feminas, llber5s pr5 victimls sacrificabant. 
Inter se saepe pugnabant ; captlv5s miser5s venum- 
dabant, vel cruciabant et trucldabant : n5nnumquam 
simulacra magna, plena victimls humanls, cremabant. 
Popul5rum inter se discordiae victoriam R5man5rum 
parabant." 

VII. Vestigia Romanorum. 

[Faliirc Indicalive and Imperalive of sjim and of Ihe isl Conjugation]. 

21. Nuper, dum Marcus et Alexander mecum 
erant, patru5 me5 " Ouantoperc me dclectabit" inquam 
"locum vlsitare ubi oppidum R5manum quondam 
stabat." Et Alexander " Monstra n5bls," inquit 
" amabo te, rulnas castelll Rutuplni." Tum patruus 
meus " Longa est via," inquit " scd aliquando mon- 
strab5. Cras, .sl v5bls gratum erit, ad locum ubi 
proclium erat Britannorum cum R5manls ambul- 



ORA ^rARITI.MA , 39 

ribimus. Ambulabitisnc ndblscum, Marcc et Alcx- 
andcr ? " "Ego ver5 " inquit Marcus " tecum libentcr 
ambulabo " ; et Alexander " Mihi quoquc pergratum 
crit, sl n5bls sepulchra Britann5rum et R^manorum 
monstrabis." Sed patruus meus " Festlna lentc " 
inquit ; " nullae sunt ibi rcliquiae sepulchrorum, et 
virT doctl de loc5 procHl disputant. Sed quota hora 
paratl critis ? " " Ouinta liora " inquiunt. 

22. Postrldie caekmi scrcnum erat. Intcr ienta- 
culum amita mea " Quota h5ra" inquit " in viam 
v5s dabitis ? et quota h5ra ccnare poteritis ? " Et 
patruus mcus " Quinta h5ra Marcus et Alcxandcr 
Dubrls adventabunt ; intra duas h5ras ad locum 
prochl ambulare poterimus ; post unam h5ram red- 
ambulabimus ; itaque h5ra decima vel undecima doml 
crimus, ut sper5." Tum ego " N5nne ieiunl erimus," 
inquam " sl nihil ante vesperum gustabimus ? " 
" Prandium v5blscum portate" inquit amita mea ; 
" cgo crustula et p5ma curab5." 



[Perfcct Indicative of si/m ancl of the ist Conjugalion.] 

23. Quinta hora appropinquabat, et amlc5s 
me5s cupide exspectabam. Ad sonum tintinnabull 
ad fenestram propcravl. Ecce, pucrl ad ianuam 
adcrant. Cum intravcrunt, univcrsl exclamavimus 
" Eugc ! Opportunc advcntavistis ! " Tum Marcus 
" Nuni scr5 advcntavimus ? " inquit ; " liora fere tertia 
fuit cum in viam n5s dedimus ; scd via longa est, 
ct Alcxander celcritcr ambularc n5n potest." Sed 
Alcxander " N5n sum fatlgatus " inquit; " scd quota 



40 



ORA MARITI.MA 



liora est ? " Tum patruus meus " Nondum quinta 
h5ra est " inquit ; " paratlne cstis ad ambulandum ? " 
Et Alexander " Nos vero ! " inquit. Tum amita mea 
et Lydia " Bene ambulate ! " inc-iuiunt, et in viam 
nos dedimus. 




C. luLius Caf.sar. 



24. Inter viam patruus meus multa nobis de bello 
Romanorum cum Britannls narravit. Prlm5 saeculo 
ante Chriscum natum Gaius lulius in GalHa bcHabat, 
et, postquam Nervi5s ceter5sque popul5^ CialHae 
Belgicae debellavit, bcHum contra incolas insulac 
propinquae paravit. Itaque ann5 quint5 et quinqua- 
gesimo c5pias suas in Britanniam transportavit. 



OKA ^rAKrri.NrA 



41 



t)e loco unde navigfivit et dc loc5 quo navigia 
.sua applicavit, viii doctl diCi disputavcrunt. Scd 
intcr Dubras et Rutupias est locus ad navigia 
applicanda idoneus. Dubras non poterat applicare ; 
nam .scopull ibi altl erant, ut nunc sunt, et in scoinills 
copiae armatae Britannorum stabant. Itaquc ad 
alium locum naviyavit, ubi nulli scopull fucrunt. 
Sed Britannl quociuc per oram maritimam ad 
locum properavcrunt, et ad pugnam sc paravcrunt. 
Romanls necessc erat navigia sua magna ad ancoras 
deligare. Britannls vada nota fucrunt ; itaque in 
aquam equilavcrunt ct copiam pugnae dederunt. 







J\vl '■% x'( ~^-^^l\ 




BkITANNI RO.MANOS IN SC01'ULIS E.KSriiCTANT. 



42 



ORA MAraTIMA 



[riuperfect {t.e. P.ist Perfect) Inclicative of siiin and of the Ist 
Conjugauon.] 

25. Scd iam ad locum adventav^cramus, et 
patruus meus " Spectate puetl " inquit; " hlc campus 
apertus est ; scopull desunt, et locus idoneus est ad 
copias explicandas. Illlc fortasse, ubi scaphas pisca- 
torias spectatis, Gaius lulius navigia R5mana ad 
ancoras deHgaverat. Hlc Britannl copias suas col- 
locaverant, et equos in aquam incitaverant. N5nne 
potestis t5tam pugnam animo spectare .'' Sed reliqua 
narrab5. Dum R5manl undls se dare dubitant, 
aquilifer ' Ad aquilam v5s congregate,' inquit * nisi 
ignavl estis. Ego certe ofiiciuni meum praestab5.' 




AOflLlFEIi SE U.NDIS UAT. 



ORA MARITIMA 



43 



Et cum aquila undTs se dcclit. lani univcrsl RonianT 
ad aquilifcrum sc congreg-averant, et cum Britannls 
in imdls impigrc pugnabant. Confusa et aspera fuit 
i5ugna. Prlmo iaborabant Romanl ; sed tandcm Brit- 
annos propulsaverunt et terram occupavcrunt, Antc 
vcsperum Britannl se fugae dederant. Numquam 
antea copiae Romanae in solo Britannico stetcrant. 
Audacia aquilifcrl laudanda erat." 



[Future Perfect Indicative oi stim and of the ist Conjugation.J 

26. Sed nos puerl prandium iam postulabamus : 
nam hora iam septima erat. Ouam bella crustula 
ct poma tu, amita, dederas ! Ouantopere nos bacae 
rubrac ct nigrae delectaverunt ! Tum patruus mcus 
" Cum nos recreaverimus," inquit " domum propcr- 
abimus ; nam non ante undecimam hdram advent- 
averimus ; interea amita tua, ml Antonl, nos exspcct- 
averit. Nonne pranchd satiatl estis V Tum cgo " Nulla 
in mc mora fucrit." Et Alcxandcr " Ego iam parfitus 
sum " inquit ; " sed quando tu, ^larcc, satiatus cris .' " 
Tum Marcus " Iciunus ful " inquit ; " nam pcr quinquc 
horas nihil gustaveram. Scd cum me altcro pomo 
rccrcavero, paratus cro. Tfi, Alcxandcr, inlcr viam 
crustulls operam dcdistl ; nam pucr parvus es." Nos 
cacliinnanuis, ct mox in \iam nos damus. 

VIII. Expeditio prima C. lalii Caesaris, 

[^rd Declensii»;! : noiins like Caciar, iui/enUor, sii', r.r/iri/://i'>.] 

27. Scd magnus crat calor sohs ct acris, ncqi c 
poteramus celcritcr ambularc. Paulo post ncbulac 
solcm obscuraverunt, et imber magnus fuit. I\Iox 



44 OKA MARITIMA 

« 

sol 5ram maritiniani splcndore suo illustravit, et 
iterum in viam n5s dedimus. Imber cal5rem aeris 
temperavcrat ; et intcr viam n5s puerl patruum mcum 
multa de C. Iuli5 Caesare, imperatore magn5 R5man- 
5rum, intcrrogavimus. " Ciar expedlti5nem suam in 
Britanniam paravit .'' " inquinius ; " cur c5pias suas in 
insulam nostram transportiivit ? " Et patruus meus 
" C. lulius Caesar " inquit " pr5consul erat Galliac, et 
per tres ann5s contra nati5nes bellic^sas Gallorum 
et Belgarum bellaverat ; nam ann5 duodesexagesim5 
ante Christum natum R5manl Caesarem pr5consulem 
creaverant. R5mani autem Britann5s in numer5 
Gall5rum esse existimabant ; et revera n5nnullae ex 
nati5nibus Britanniae merldianae a Belgls oriundae 
crant. Atque Britannl Gallls auxilia contra R5manos 
interdum subministraverant; sed Trinobantes auxil- 
ium R5man5rum contra Cassivellaunum, regulum 
Cassorum, imploraverant." 

28. " Alia quoque causa belll fucrat avaritia et 
exspectati5 praedae. Cupidl erant R^manl insulam 
nostram ign5tam et rem5tam vlsitandl et cxpl5randl ; 
nam, ut Tacitus affirmat, ign5tum pr5 magnific5 cst. 
Itaquc ann5 quint5 ct quinquagesim5 antc Christum 
natum C. lulius Caesar expedlti5nem suam prlmam 
contra Britann5s comparavit, ct vict5riam reportavit, 
ut narravl ; nam post unum proelium Britannl veniam 
avict5ribus imploraverunt. Sed expcdlti5 n5n magna 
fuerat ; neque R5manl ullam pracdam ex Britannia 
reportavcrant, nisi pauc5s servos et captlv5s. Anno 
igitur proxim5 imi)crator Romanus secundam et 



ORA MARITIMA 45 

multo maiorein expeditionem in Britanniam paravit. 
Nam sescenta navigia oneraria in Gallia aedificavit, 
et quinque legiones Romanas una cum mag-na multi- 
tudine auxiliorum Gallicorum in oram Bclgicam con- 
gregavit." 

IX. Pax violata. 

[3rd Declension continued : nouns hke puj:, aesias, mlUs.] 

29. " Britannl paccm non violaverant, scd Ro- 
mani pacis non cupidl erant. Itaque aestate anni 
quarti et quinquagesiml ante Christum natum dux 
Romanus cum quinque legionibus militum Roman- 
orum et magnd numerd equitum et auxiliorum Gallic- 
orum iterum in Britanniam navigavit. Tempestas 
erat idonea, sed in media navigatione ventus non 
iam flabat ; itaque militibus necesse erat navigia 
remls incitare. Impigre remigaverunt, et postrldie 
navigia ad oram Britannicam prospere applicaverunt. 
Labor remigandl magnus erat, virtus mllitum magn- 
opere laudanda. Britannl Romanos in scopulls orae 
maritimae exspectabant ; sed postquam multitudinem 
navigiorum et mllitum equitumque spectaverunt, in 
fugam se dederunt. Caesar navigia sua inter Dubras 
et Rutupias applicavit, ut puto, non procul a loco quo 
pri5re anno applicaverat. Inde contra Britannos pro- 
peravit. Interea unam legidnem cum trecentls equit- 
ibus ad castra in stati5ne reservabat : nam perlcul- 
osum erat navigia ad ancoras deligata defens5ribus 
nudare," 



-46 



ORA MARITIMA 




Castra Romana. 

X. Certamina varia. 

[yd Declension conlinucd : nouns Vike flilmai, tempjis.] 

.'»0. " BiitannT certamen vltaverunt, et in silvTs 
se occLiltavcrunt, ubi locus erat prope flumen, egregie 
et natura et opere firmatus. Itaque ' oppidum ' Brit- 
annicum erat. De nomine fluminis nihil constat. 
Oppidum iam ante domesticl belll causa praepar- 
averant, et crebrls arboribus vallTsque firmavcrant, 
Multa et varia certamina fuerunt : Britannl ex 
silvls cum equitibus essedTsque suTs contra Romanos 
provolabant ; Romanls perTculosum erat intrii munlt- 
iones Britannorum intrare. Scd post aliquantum 



ORA MARITIMA 



47 



temporis mTlitcs septimac lcgionis aggere et testudine 
locum oppugnavcrunt. Tandem Britannos ex silvls 
propulsavcrunt. Pauca crant vulnera Romanorum : 
nam Romanl Britannos pondcre armorum et scientia 
pug-nandl multum superabant ; magnitudine et robore 
corporis Britannl Romanos superabant. Sed Romanl 
quoque homines robust5 corpore erant." 




ESSEDU.M BUITANMCC.M. 

31. " Vict5ria Cacsarl non multum pr5fuit : nam 
Britannls fugatls instarc n5n potcrat, quia naturam locl 
ign5rabat. Praeterea praefectus castr5rum, n5mine 
Ouintus Atrius, magnum incommodum nuntiavcrat : 
tcmpestas navigia in lltorc afflictaverat. Tem "(us 
pcrlcul5sum crat ; nam Cacsarl nccessc erat a flumine 



48 ORA MARITIMA 

ad iTtus maritimum properarc, et legiones suas 
ab insectatione Britannorum revocare. ]\Iulta ex 
navigils in vadls afflictata erant ; cetera novls 
armls ornanda erant. Opus mag-ni laboris erat, et 
aliquantum temporis postulabat. Sed nautarum atque 
militum virtijs magno opere laudanda erat. Non 
solum per diurna sed etiam per nocturna tempora 
laboraverunt. Interea Caesar nova navigia in Gallia 
aedificat : sine navigils n5n poterat copias suas in 
Galliam reportare; uno tempore necesse erat et navigia 
reparare et contra Britannos bellare." 

XL Naves Romanae, 

[3rd Declenslon continued : nouns like naz^/s.] 

32. "Duo erant generanavium in classe Romana; 
unum erat genus navium longarum, alterum navium 
onerariarum. Naves longae ad pugnam aptae erant, 
naves onerariae ad onera atque multitudinem 
hominum et equorum transportanda. Tota classis 
Caesaris octingentarum erat navium ; nam sescentas 
naves onerarias per hiemem in Gallia aedificaverat, 
ut narravl. Inter ceteras, ducentas numero, nonnullae 
navcs longae erant. Sed navibus longls revera non 
opus crat Caesarl ; nam Britannls antlquls nulla erat 
classis ; neque naves onerarias aedificabant." Tum 
ego " Britannia nondum domina undarum erat " 
inquam ; " sed quomodo frumentum exportare 
poterant, sl nullas navcs aedificabant .'' " " \'enet- 
orum naves " inquit patruus meus " frumentum 
Britannicum in Galliiim portabant, et e.\ (jalliu 



ORA MARITIMA 



49 



gemmas, vitrca, cctcra in Britanniam. Nam VenctT, 
natio maritima, in ora Gallica habitabant. Hostes 
fucrant Romanorum, ct magnam classem com- 
paravcrant." 

33. Tum Marcus " Num nati5ncs barbarae " 
inquit " navcs lonCTas ornarc poterant .'' " Et patruus 
mcus " Formam nfivium Gallicarum Caesar in tertio 
libro Bclli GallicT commemorat. Puppes altae erant, 
ad magnitudincm tempestatum accommodatae ; 
carTnae planae. VcnetT nilves totas ex rSbore 
fabricabant ; ad ancoras catenTs ferrcTs, non funibus, 
deligabant. Pclles pro velTs erant, sTve propter iTnT 
inopiam, sTvc quia in pellibus plus firmitudinis quam 
in velTs iTneTs erat. Naves longae R5man5rum n5n 
tam altae erant quam Venet5rum, sed rostrTs ferreTs 
et interdum turribus armatae erant ; itaque vict5riam 
a VenetTs reportaverant." Tum Alexander " Num 
naves R5manae laminTs ferrcTs armatae erant .'' " inquit. 
Sed Marcus : " Ouid opus erat laminTs ferrcTs, sT 
tormenta hodicrna antTquTs dcerant .^ " 




50 ORA IVIARITIMA 

XII. Gentium Britannicarum Societas. 

[3rd Declension continued : nouns Vike ^cns, fars]. 

34. Tum patruus meus reliqua de expedltione 
Caesaris narravit. " Dum milites nautaeque Romanl 
classem novls armls ornant, Caesar ad rcliquas copias 
properat. Interea hostes summum imperium 
Cassivellaund mandaverant. Cassivellaunus non erat 
rex ijniversarum gentium Britannicarum, sed dux 
vel princeps gentis Cas.sorum. Anno tamen quarto 
et quinquagesimo ante Christum natum magna pars 
gentium Britanniae merldianae se sub Cassivellauno 
contra Romanos consociaverant. Flumen Tamesa 
flnes Cassivellauni a finibus gentium maritimurum 
separabat ; ab oriente erant flnes Trinobantium ; ab 
occidente Britannl mediterranel. Superiore tempore 
bella continua fuerant inter Cassivellaunum et rcHquas 
gentes ; atque Trinobantes auxiHum Romanorum 
contra CassiveHaunum imploraverant, quia regem 
suum trucldaverat. Numerus hostium magnus erat ; 
nam, ut Caesar afiirmat, inflnlta multitudo hominum 
erat in parte mcrldiana Britanniae." 

35. " Caesar formam et incolas Britanniae in 
capite duodecimo et tertio decimo librl quintl com- 
memorat. Incolac partis interioris Ccltae et barbarl 
erant ; incolae maritimae partis ex Belgio pracdac 
causa immigraverant, slcut pri5re aetate trans flumen 
Rhenum in Bclgium migraverant. Kt nonnulla 
n5mina gentium maritimarum, unde n5mina urbium 
hodicrnarum dCMivfita sunt, P>clgica vel GaUica sunt. 



ORA MARITIMA 5I 

Belgac autcm fi GcimrmTs oriundl erant, ut Caesar in 
capite quart5 librT secundT dcMnonstrat. Itaque pars 
BritannSrum antTquorum Germanica orTgine erant. 
Formam insulae esse triquetram declarat. Scd 
unum latus ad Galliam spcctarc cxistimat, alterum ad 
Ilispaniam atque occidentem, tertium ad septentriones. 
Itaque de lateribus et angulls laterum errabat. 
Hiberniam ab occidcnte parte Britanniae esse recte 
iudicat, insulam Monam inter Britanniam et 
Hiberniam esse." 

XIII. Maria Britannica. 

[3rd Declension continiicd : nouns like mare]. 
3G. " Lateris prlml longitfidinem circiter quin- 
genta mllia esse iudicat, secundl scptingenta, tcrtil 
octingenta. Itaque de magnitiadine insulae non 
multum errabat. Flumen Tamesam a marl circiter 
octoginta mllia distare iudicat." Hlc nos puerl 
" Errabat igitur " inquimus ; " nam inter Londinmm et 
mare non sunt octdginta mllia." Sed patruus meus 
"Recte iudicabat" inquit; "nam pars maris ubi Caesaris 
castra erant circiter octoginta mllia Romana a 
Londinio distat. Tria maria insulam nostram 
circumdant ; inter Britanniam et Galliam est mare 
Britannicum vel fretum Gallicum ; ab occidente mare 
Ilibcrnicum ; ab oriente mare Germanicum. Nomina 
marium temporibus antlquTs n5n usitata erant ; sed 
iam Graecl Britanniam esse insulam iudicabant." 

XIV. Britannia pacata. 

[Recapilulation of nouns of ihe jrd Declension.] 

37. " Inter Tamesam et mare Britannicum piTma 



52 



ORA ^rARITIMA 



concursio erat Romanorum ciim c5piT.s Cas.si\-ellaiinT. 
BritannT duas cohortcs Romanas in itinere fortiter im- 
pugnaverunt. Ex silvTssuTs pr5volaverunt ; R5man5s 
in fugam dcderunt ; mult5s R5man5rum trucTd- 
averunt. Tum su5s a pugna revocaverunt. Novum 
gcnus pugnaeR5manbs perturbaverat. Nam BritannTs 
non mos erat iust5 proeli5 pugnare ; sed equitibus 
essedTsque suTs per omnes partes equitabant, et 
ordines hostium perturbabant ; tum consulto c5pias 
suas revocabant. EssedariT interdum pedibus pugna- 
bant. Ita m5bilitatem equitum, stabilitatem peditum 
in proeliTs praestabant. Pedites R5map.T propter 
pondus arm5rum n5n aptT erant ad luiiusmodT hostem. 




liUllAN.M CUM RilMAMS IN lll.NKKl': riHl.NAM-. 



ORA MARITIM.^ 53 

Et equitibus Romanls peiiculosum erat se longo 
intervallo a peditibus scparfire : neque pedibus 
pugnare poterant." 

38. " Itaque Romani ordincs suos contra equitcs 
Britannorum in prlmo certamine non servaverant. 

Sed postrldie Romanl victoriam reportavcrunt; 
Britannl in collibus prccul a castrls Romanls stabant. 
Caesar magnum numerum cohortium et univcrsos 
equites lcgato suo Trebonio mandaverat. Hostes 
subito provolaverunt, et ordincs Romanos impugn- 
averunt. Sed Romanl supcriores fuerunt. Copias 
Britannicas propulsaverunt, et in fugam dedcrunt. 
Magnum numerum hostium trucldaverunt. Tum dux 
continuls itineribus ad flumen Tamesam et in flnes 
Cassivellaunl properavit. Cassivellaunus autem cum 
quattuor mlHbus essedariorum itinera Romanorum 
servabat, ct paulum de via decllnabat seque in silvls 
occultabat. Interdum ex silvls provolabat et cum 
militibus Romanls pugnabat ; Romanl autcm agros 
Britannorum vastabant." 

39. " In partc fluminis Tamcsae ubi flncs Cassi- 
vellaunl erant unum tantum vadum erat. Qu6 cum 
Caesar adventavit, copias hostium ad alteram rlpam 
fliiminis collocatas spectavit. Rlpa autem sudibus 
acLitis firmata erat ; ct Britannl multas sudes sub aqua 
quoque occultaverant. Sed Caesar hostibus instare 
non dubitavit. Aqua fluminis profunda erat, et milites 
capite solum ex aqua exstabant ; sed Romanl se aquae 



54 



ORA MARITIMA 



fortiter mandaverunt, et Britannos in fugam dederunt. 
' Oppidum ' CassivellaunT non longe aberat, inter silvas 
paludesque situm, quo Britannl magnum numerum 
hominum, equorum, ovium, boum, congregaverant. 
Locum egregie et natura et opere firmatum Caesar 
ex duabus partibus oppugnare properavit : oppidum 
expugnavit et defensores fugavit." 




BuiTANNI CASrilA ROMANA Ol'1'Lv 



40. " Sed in Cantio, ubi quattuor rcgcs Britannls 
praeerant, nondum flnis erat pugnandl. Britannl 
castra Romana ad mare sita fortitcr oppugnant ; sed 
frustra. Ronianl victorcs. Interea multac ex clvitat- 
ibus Britannicls pacem orant. Trinobantibus Caesar 



ORA MARITIMA 



5; 



novum rcgem dat, et pacem confirmat. Itaque propter 
tot cladcs, proptcr flncs suos bello vastatos, maxime 
autcm propter dcfcctioncm tot clvitatum, Cassivel- 
launus de condicionibus pacis dcllberat. Cacsar paccm 
dat ; Cassivellaunum vetat Trinobantcs bello vexare, 
et tributum Britannls imperat. Tum copias suiis cum 
magn5 numero obsidum et captlvorum in Galliam 
reportat. Britannl fortiter sed frustra pro ails et 
focls suis pugnaverant." 




TR0?AKUM liK.llANMCUM. 



56 ORA MARITIMA 

XV. Robur et aes triplex. 

[Adjectives of the 3rd Declension.] 

41. Tum Marciis "ogentem fortem ct admlrabil- 
em Britanndrum !" inquit. " Nam insigne erat facinus 
quod contra Romanos, victdres orbis terrarum, tam 
fortiter et nonnumcjuam prospere pugnaverunt. Non 
mlrum est, sl R5manl vict5riam reportavCM-unt." Nos 
sententiam Marcl comprobavimus. Sed iam n5na hora 
erat, cum Alexander, digito ad orientem monstrans, 
" Nonne naves procul a lltore spectatis } " inquit. Et 
patruus meus " Ita est " inquit ; " nam illic est stati5 
tuta navibus. Sed illae naves, ut put5, naves iongae 
sunt ex classe Britannica ; nam pars classis nostrae 




Navis Longa Britannica. 



ORA MAKITIMA 57 

nuiic in freto Gallico est. Tum ego "euge, optime! " 
inquam ; " nfivem longam adhuc non spectavl. Sed 
non tam grandcs sunt quam putavi." "Pergrandcs 
sunt,".inquit patruus meus " sed procul a lltore sunt ; 
omncs laminls ferrels, nonnullae arictibus vel turribus 
armatae sunt." 

42. Tum nautam veteranum de nominibus navi- 
uin longarflm interrogavimus. In classe Britannica 
militaverat, sed tum mllitia vacabat, et cuslds crat orae 
maritimae. Nomina navium, ut affirmabat, erant 
Grandis, Rcgdlis, Magnifica, Tonans, A rrogans, Fcrox ; 
omnibus tcgimen erat laminls ferrels fabricatum. In 
Grandi praefectus classis nfivigabat. Omnes ad 
ancoram deligatae erant. Tum Ale.xander " Cur n5n " 
inquit " ad naves in scapha navigamus?" Mihi et 
Marco propositum pergrfitum erat ; et nauta ad 
navigandum paratus erat. Itaque patruus mcus " Ser5 
domum adventabimus" inquit ; " sed sl vos puerl 
cupidl cstis navem longam spectandl, ego n5n deneg- 
ab5." Tum nauta " Exspectate" inquit "dum omnia 
par5 " ; et vcla rem5sc]ue in scapham portavit. Ouam 
dulce erat in marl tranquill5 navigare! Ventus lenis 
flabat, et brevl tcmpore ad Rcgdlcni appropinquavimus. 
Tum ciassiaril n5bls navem ingentem monstraverunt 
cum machinls, tormcntls, rostrls, ccterls. 

43. H5ra iam decima erat cum a Rcgdll wos in 
scapham dedimus. Tum ad lltus remigare necesse 
erat ; nam ventus adversus erat. Kgo et Marcus una 
cum patru5 mc5 et nauta vcteran5 rcmis lab^rfnimus. 



58 ORA MARITIMA 

Sed nbn ante undecimam horam m lltore stetimus, 
Dum domum properamus, imber fuit, et neqesse erat 
in tabcrna aliquantum temporis exspectare : intrav- 
imus et nos recreavimus ; nam fatlgatl eramus. Sed 
' post tenebrils lux.' Cum domum adventavimus, amita 
mea et Lydia " Ubi tam diu fuistis?" inquiunt ; " nos 
anxiae fuimus ; sed cena iam parata est." Tum nos 
"Multa spectavimus " inquimus ; " ambuliitio longa 
sed pcrgrata et utilis fuit." Post ccnam Marcus ct 
Alexander Dubras in vehiculo properaverunt. Ego 
per noctem de Britannls antlquls et de classe Britan- 
nicahodierna somniavl. Ante oculos erant virl fortes 
membrls robustls, flavls capillls, oculls caerulels cum 
Romanls terra marlque pugnantes. 



DULCE DOMUM. 



Deus Salvam Fac Reginam, 
Matre.m P^atriae. 



PREPARATIONS 

NOTE TO TIIE TeACHER ON THE PrONU NCIATION OF WOUDS. If the 

last syllable but one of a worJ of more than Iwo syllables is lons;; it is also 
iiccented : 'd short, the atcent is ihrown back on to the last syllable but Iwo, 
But words of ortly Iwo syllables are always accented on the first of the Iwo. 

Syllables closed by two or more consonants are moslly long, as in viLLa, 
luSCima, iNTeRDiiin, paKTeni, uMBRa, feneSTRa ; so too are sylibles 
containing a double vowel, as in iiAUtAE. But many syllables ending in a 
single consonant and containing a single vowel are also long, because the vowel 
is itself a long vowel : these vo\»els are marked in the lext and vocabuiaries 
of this book. Thus beala and aiUiiiia have ihe middle syllable long, and are 
Iherefore marked beata, antyqna : and it is because the middle syllable in each 
of these words has a long vowel in it ihat it is accenied [bedta, anttqiia). 
Vowcls which do not bear any mark niay bc regarded as short, as in doiiiiiia, 
aiiiita, casa, quoijite, tiica, tita (accented doinina, dinita, cdsa, qnoque, tnc'a, 
tiia). 

In the Drill Exercises and Appendices (pp. 101-144) the quantities of the 
long vo-.vels are not marked, except lor some special reason (e.g. in order to 
dislinguish the ablative singular of the xst declension from ihe nominalive 
singular). These pages will provide an opportunity of testing how far ihe ear 
of the pupil has been trained by the sludy of the text. 



6o 



PREPARATIONS 



L The Sea Coast. 



[English w<jrds connected with the 
translations of them, are given in square 

§1. 



Latin by origin, but not intended ac I 
brackets and Roman type.] 



quam bella 


hoiv beautifiil 


viUae 


of the country-house 


est 


is 


area 


an open space [area] 


ora maritima 


L the sea-shore 


in area 


in the open space 


non procul 


not/ar 


castanea 


a chestnut-tree 


ab ora marit 




ubi 


where 


ima 


from the sea-shore 


luscinia 


a nightingaie 


villa 


a countrv-house 


interdum 


sometimes 




[villa] 


cantat 


sings 


in villa 


in the country-house 


sub umbra 


uhder the shade 


amita mea 


my aunt 




(umbra, shade ; 


habitat 


dweils, lives 




cf. ' umbrella ') 


et 


atid 


castaneae 


of ihe chestnut-tree 


ego habito 


I divell, I am 


ancilla 


a maid-servant 




staying 


cenam ^axai prepares supper 


cuni amita raea ^vith viy aunt 


amo oram 


I love the shore 


nunc 


now 


amo villam / love t/ie pretty 


ante ianuam 


before the door 


bellam 


country-house 



Compare the different forms of the same word (Singular 
Number) in the foUowing sentences : 

Villa bella est. There is a pretty country house, or T/ie countfj- 
house is pretty. 

Villam bellam amO. I love the pretty country-Iwuse. 

lanua villae bellae est aperta. Tfu door of the pretty country- 
house is open. 

In villa bella habitu. / am staying in the pretty country house. 

NoTE. ego habito, 1 am staying (where the word / has some 
strcsb) ; amo, / love (whcre the word / has no stress.) 



PREPARATIONS 



6l 



§2. 

feriae 
sunt 

feriae nunc sunt 

inter ferias 

in villa maritima 

6 beatas ferias ! 

in arena 

orae marilimae 

ancorae 

et 

catenae 

nam 



holidays 
are or there 

are 
it is now ihe 

holidays 
during t/ie 

holidays 
in the country- 

house by 

the sea 
oh, the happy 

holidays 1 
on the sand 
ofthe sea coast 
anchors 
and 
chains 
for 



incolae 
nautae 
magna est 

audacia 

nautarum 
procellas formi- 
dant 

nautas anio 
ut 

nautae 
me amant 
cum naulis 
in scaphis 

navigo 



the inhabitants 
sailors 
great is (or is 

great) 
the courage 
of sailors 

they fear 

storms 
I like sailors 
as 

sailors 
like me 

with the sailors 
ifi boais 

[skiffs] 
I sail [navi- 

gate] 



Compare the forms of the Plural ' nautae,' sailors, in the above 
senlences : nautae me amant, sailors lihe iiic ; nautas amo, I like 
sailors ; audacia nautarum, the courage of sailors ; cum nautis, 
with sailors. Note that the ending -ae, like the EngUsh -s, has 
two diffcrent meanings : nautae = (i) sailor^s, (2) sailors. 

Compare the different forms of the same word (Plural Num- 
ber) in the following sentences : 

Villae bellae sunt. There are pretty country-houses, or Tli 
country-houses are pretty. 

Villas bellas amo. I love pretty countryhouses. 

lanuae villarum bellarum sunt apertae. The doors of the pretty 

couulry-hoiises are opcn. 

In villis btrllis habitant. Thcy dwell in pretty country-houses. 



62 

§3. 

ex fenestris 

undas spectas 
caeruleas 



PREPARATIONS 



otit oj ipxfrom) 
the windows 
thou seest (you 
see) the waves 
blue 

quam magnae sunt hoiv big they 
are (i.e. the 





waves, und- 




ae) 


per-lucidae 


transparent 




[lucid] 


post cenam 


a/ter stipper 


lunam specto 


I see the moon 


stellas 


the stars 


ex fenestra mea 


from my win- 




dow 


prope villam 


near the coun- 




try-house 


silva 


a wood 


saepe 


often 


ambulo 


I walk 


Quantopere 


hoiv 7nuch 



nos delectat 
6 copiam 

plantarum 
herbarum 

bacarum 
non solum 
sed etiam 
agricolae 
circum 
habitant 
casae 

agricolarum 
parvae 
casas albas 
habitant 

casas visitat 



delights us 

oh the abund- 

ance 
ofplants 
of grasses, of 

herbs 
of berries 
notonly [solely] 
but also 
farmers 
around 
dzvell 
the cottages 
of the farmers 
small 

inhabit white 

cottages 
visits the 

cotta^es 



Compare the Singular and Phiral forms of the word 'amita' 
in the following sentences : 

Amita niea casas visitat. Aly aunt visits cottages. 

Amitae meae casas visitant. My aunts visit cottagcs. 
Amitam meani amo. I love my aunt. 

Amitas meas amo. I love my aunts. 
Amitae meae villa est bella. Afy aunfs country-house is pretty. 

Amiiarum mearum villae sunt bellae. My aunts' 
country-houses are pretty. 
Cum amua mca ambulo. I tvalk with my aunt. 

Cum amilis mois anibulo. 1 7valk ivith my aunts. 



PREPARATIONS 



63 



Notice that the forms in -am (Singular) and -as (Plural) occur 

(i) after certain Prepositions : 

ante ianuam, beforc thc door ; post cenam, after suppcr ; 
prope villam, near the hoiise ; inter feiias, durmg the holidays. 

(2) without any Preposition, to complete the sense with certain 
Verbs. The form in -am or -as is then called the Object of the 
Verb, In the following sentences it will be seen that the forms 
in -am and -as differ in meaning from those in -a and -ae just 
as vie diflfers from / (or ' /«';//,' ' them,' ' 7ahom,' from ' he,' 
*they,' 'who') in English : — 



/ 


love 




sailoi 


s. 


Ego 


amo 




nautas. 


Sai/ors 


love 




me. 




Nautae 


aman 


t 


me. 




The maid 


servant prepares 


suppcr. 


Ancilla 


parat 




cenam. 


Sailors 


inhabit 


whitc 


cottas;es. 


Nautae 


habitant 


casas albas. 


§4. 










regina mea 


my queen 


undarum 




of the 7mves 


magna 


great 


triumplio 




I triumpJi, I 


gloria 


the glory 






exult 


Vicloriae Reglnae of Queeti Vic- 


te amo 




I love tJiee 




toria (or Queen 


Britannia 




Britain 




yiJoria's) 


vos 




you 


in insulis Brit- 




insulae B 


itann- 




annicls 


in the British 


icae 




British is/es 




islands 


non cst 




is not 


coloniae Britann 




patria 




native-Iand 


icae 


BritisJi colonies 


ex Africa 






domina 


mistrcss 


Meridiana 


from SoutJi 




[dame] 






Africa 


multarum terrarum of many lands 


sum 




I am 



Note that the forms in -a (Singular) and -ae (Plural) may 
be used in speaking to persons or tliings . in such cases we may 
translate by using the word 'o' in EngHsh, but generally it is 
bctter to leave out this word : te, Britannia, anio, / love thee, 
Britai/i : vOs, insulae Biitannicae, amo, J leve you, BritisJi islcs. 



64 



PREPARATIONS 



§5. 



quoque 


foo, aho 


operani das 


givest (gtve) 


consobrina 


cousin 




attention 


apud amitam 






( = study) 


meam 


at the Jiouse of 


ego operam do 


I glve atten- 




my aunt 




tion 


columbas curat 


keeps doves 


linguis antiquis 


to tJie ancieni 


cura 


the care 




ianguages 


columbarum 


of doves 


Romae 


of Rome 


LyJiae 


io Lydia 


Graeciae 


of Greece 


laetitiam dat 


gives delight 


cum Lydia 


see § I : cum 


tii, Lydia 


thou iyou), 
Lydia 




amita mea 




ad siivam 


to ihe tvood 


cum 


when 


vel 


or 


es 


thou art. 


navigamus 


we sail 




you are 


undae delectant 


the ivaves de- 


apud magistram 






light 


tuam 


at the house of 


vos, filiae, amatisjw/, o daugh- 




thy iyouf) 




ters, love 




schoolmisti-ess 


vos amat 


loves you 


linguae Franco- 
gallicae 


to the French 


ubi . . . ibi 


where . . there 




language 


inopia 


want, poverty 


Anglicae 


to the English 


levat 


relieves 



I 



Compare carefuUy : 

Ly diae laetitiam dat, gives pleasure tO Lydia. 

ad Silvam ambulr>, I wa/k tO the wood. 

The forms in -ae (Singular) and -is (Plural) meaning *to' are 
often found wiih verbs of ' giving ' ; hence they are called the 
' Dative Case' (Case of Giving). But they are notused with verbs 
of^going') wiih these verbs 'to' \s expresscd by the Preposition 
' ad ' foUowed by a form in -am (Singular) or -as (Plural). 



PREPARATIO.NS 



65 



First Declension, 



Name of Case. 



Ist Case. 


l.ulia 


Lydia 


Noniinative 


2nd Case. 


Lvdia 


Lvdia 


"Vocative. 


3rd Case. 


Lvdiam 


Lydia 


Accusative. 


4th Case. 


Lvdiae 


Lydias, of Lydia 


Genitive. 


5th Case. 


Lvdiae 


io Lydia 


Dative. 


6th Case. 


cum Lvdia 


■vith Lydia 


Ablative, 



SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1 

2 
3 
4 
5 

6 


villa bella 
villa bella 
villam bellam 
villae bellao 
villae bellae {with a vcrb 
cfgiviiif) 

in villS bella 


vi?lae bellae 
villae bellae 
villas bellas 
villariim bellarum 
villis bellls {'a<ith a verb of 
'givittg') 
in villis bellls 



^^The Preposition which is uscd with the Ablative Case 
must be varied to suit the sense of the noun which is being 
dechned : e.g. 'cum Lydia/ but ' in villa ' or 'ex villa' or *a villa.' 



Present Tense of 'sum' and Ist Conjug-ation. 



ISt rERSON 

2nd Pkrson 
3rd Person 



ist Person 
2nd Person 
3rd Person 



SINGULAR. 
snm, / am 

63, thoH art {yon are) 
est, he (she, it) is 



spectO, J see 

apectSs, thou ieest {you see) 

spectat, he (she, it) sees 



PLURAL. 
snmns, we are 
estis, you are 
6unt, they are 



spectamus, we see 
spectitis, you see 
spectant, they see 



The verb 'do,' L give, has a short a in the ist and 2nd pcrson 
pUiral : damus, datis. 



66 



PREPARATIONS 



II. My Uncle. 

§ 0. SS" In this and ihe foUowing Preparations the nouns of the ist Decl. 
will be given in the Nom. Sing. , except when a whole phrase is quoted. 



patruus meus 


my tincle 


prope hortum 


near the gar- 


quondam 




once, formerly 




den 


praefectus 




an officer 


unde 


w/ience, from 


erat 




7t'as 




which 


militia* vacat 


he is free (i.e. 


aqua 


water 




he has 


retired) from 


portamus 


7ve fetch, we 




mi/itary service 




carry 


agello suo 




to his farm 


hortum irrigamus we waier 


agellus 




the farm or 
estate 




[irrigate] tht 
garden 


patrui mei 




of my iincle 


in horto 


in the garden 


magnus 




large 


nunicrus 


nitmber 


circum viU 


ani 


around t/ie 


ros.i 


a rose 






villa 


viola 


a violet 


hortus 




a garden 


tibi 


to t/iee, to you 


murus 




a 'iVall 


mi patrue 


?ny unc/e 


horti 




of the gardcn 


cum patruo meo 


7vith my unc/e 


altus 




high 


ambulas 


i/iou wa//iest. 


rivus 




a stream - 
[river] 




you wa/k 


*Note the 


Ablat 


ve without a Preposition, here meaning ' froni.' 





Second Declensior 


. 




NOUNS AND AdJECTIVES IN -US. 




SINGULAR NUMBER. 




1 


hortus bellus, a pretty garden 




2 


horte belle, o pretty gardeti 




3 


hortum bellum, a pretty garden 




4 


horti belll, of a pretty garden 




5 


horto bell5, to a pretty garden (with a 
verb of ' giving ') 




6 


in horto bello, in a pretty garden 





PREPARATIONS 



67 



§7. 

angulus 

ulmi 

in ulmis 

corvi 

nidificant 

corvos specto 

libenter 



angle^ corncr 

elms 

in the elms 

crozvs 

make nests 

I watch the 

crows 
gladly 



circum nidos suos round their 

7iests 
volitant tliey Jiy 

cor vo ru m of crows 

multi mergi many sea-gt!i/s 

super oceanum over the ocean 
mergi sea-guiis 

volitatis yoii fiy 

praeda prey 

captatis you catch 

oceanus tJie ocean 



mergis 

cibum dat 

agellus suus 

equi 

vacca 

porci 

galli gallinae- 

gallos ciirat 

vicus 

rusticl 



nonnuiii ex 
rusticis 

cum e(juls 



to sea gulis 
gives food 
iiis estate 
iiorses 
cozu 

pigs [pork] 
que cochs and hens 
minds t/ie cocks 
a viiiage 
tiie country- 
/oik, tiie 
rustics 

some of{put of) 

the rustics 
7vith {togetJier 

witJi) tJie 

Jiorses 



Note in the above : — 1. corvl nldificant, crotvs maJie nests. 
2. vos, corvl, you, croivs. 3. corvos specto, 1 watch crows. 
4. namerus corvorum, a 7iumber o/ croivs. 5. corvls dat, gives 
io crows. G. cum corvls, ivith c7-ozvs. 



SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1 

2 
3 

4 
5 

6 


hortus bellus 
horte belle 
hortum bellum 
horti belli 

horto bella (with a verb 
of 't^iving') 
iu horto bellS 


horti belli 
liorti bslli 
hortos belloa 
hortorura bcllorum 
horlij belils (with a verb of 
' giving ■) 
in hortij bellia 



68 



rKKPARATIONS 



§ 8. /tS" In this and Ihe following 
in -tis wili be given in the Nom. Sing. 



1'reparations the nouns of the 2n(l Decl. 
, except when a whole phrase is quoled. 



sropiihis albus 


a 7vkife diff 


spcctare 


to see 


ab-est 


is distant 


(undae) tran- 


cahn, tranqiiil 


noctu 


by night, in the 


quillae 


{ivaves) 




tiight time 


havaris 


you wash [lave] 


pharus 


lighthouse 


delectatis 


you delight 


velut 


as, even as 


(undae) turbu- 




stella clara 


a bright star 


lentae 


rough, turbu- 


in 5cean6 


on the ocean 




lent {waves) 


illustrat 


lights iip 


spuinatis 


you foani —^ 




[ilkistrates] 


murmuratis 


you viurniur - 



IIL Ancicnt Monuments. 

§ 9- ^^" In this and ihe following Preparations the verbs of ihe ist 
Conjugation, Present Ten~e, will be givcn in the ist Pcrson Sing., except 
where a whole phrase is qaoted. 



in Cantio 


/;/ Kent 


m.uUos r.ummos 


many coins 


inter 


betiveen 


(nummos) aureoj 


golden {coins) 


Dubrae 


JDover 


(nummos) argen 


(coins) made of 


Rutupiae 


Richborough 


teos 


silver 


situs 


situated — 


(nummos) aeneos made of coppcr 


opl^ida antlqua 


aficient towns 


et . . . et 


both . . . and 


nmka monumenta many monti- 


Britannus 


a Briton 




ments 


occulto 


Ihide 


vestlgia 


vestiges, traces 


causa 


a cause, source 


Romanus 


a Roman 


lucri 


of gain [hicre] 


rehquiae 


relics 


aro 


I plough 


oppidorum 


of towns 


fundamenta 


thefoundations 


amphithealrorum 


of amphi- 


aedificiorum 


of buildings 




theatres 




[edifices] 


hodie 


to-day, at the 


excavo 


/ excavate 




present day 


magno pretio* 


at a grcat price 


ex-sto 


lexist, remain 


venum-do 


I offerfor sale 


via 


a road 


patruo mco est 


my uncle has ; 


Londinium 


London 


lileraily to my uncle 


solum 


soil 


there is 



*Note the Ablative without a rrcposition, here meaning 'at,' 
(an expression of ' price ' or ' value '). 



PKErARATIONS 



69 



Note the words Dubrae, Dover ; Rutiipiae, Richboroitgh ; 
rcliquiae, relics. These words are Plural in form and have no 
Siiigular. The first two are Singu'ar in mcaning, hke the English 
'Alhenj' (Lalin 'Alhena^'); the third is Plural in meaning. 



Second Declension— r.?;//'//»/^^. 

NOUNS AND AdJECTIVES IN -UM. 



SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1, 2, 3 
4 
5 

« 


oppidum, a town, town 
oppidi, of a to-vn 
oppido, to a town (with a 
verb of ' giving ') 
in oppido, in a io-am 


oppila, to-ifns, towns 
oppidorum, of towns 
oppidis, to toivns (with a 
verb of ' giving ') 
in oppidis, in towns 



Similarly with an adjective : oppidum antlquum, an ancient town. 



§ 10- t3' In this and the foUowing Preparations the nouns of the 2nd 
Declension in -um will be given in the Nom. Sing., e.xcept when a whole 
phrase is quoted. 



conimentarii 

dc vita mea 
scriptito 



super oppidum 
castellum 
specula 
murl lati 



notes^ com- 

tnentaries 
al out my life 
1 7vrite, jot 
down 
[scribble] 
above the town 
fort [castle] 
a watch tower 
broad walls 



aedificium con- a ronsecrated 
secratimi building 

iam already 

secundo saeculo* /;/ the second 
century 

post Christum 
naium 



afler the birth 
ofChrisl{\\\.. 
after Christ 
born) 
ba^iiHc.x Christ- c. Christian 
iana basilica (or 

church^ 

*Note the Ablative without a Prcposition, here meaning 'in' 
(an expression of ' time whcn 'V 



70 



PREPARATIONS 



§11. 

promunturium 

sto 

post castellum 

ClTvus gramineus 

fretum Gallicum 



oculus 
velum album 



§12. 

delectamentum 

puerorum 
amicus 
dud puerl 
Marcus 
puer 

quattuor-decim 
annus 

quattuordecim 
annorum 



a pro)Hontor}\ 
headland 

I stand 

behind the 
castle 

a grassy JiUl 
or doivn 

the English 
(lit. ^Ganic) 
C/tciHfiel 

an eye 

a white sail 



navigium Ger- 

manicum 
navigium Belgi- 

cum 
ndnnuUa (r;avi- 

gia) 
ex navigiis 
sunt nominata 
" casiella " i.e 
littcra C 
in signo 
in (with Acc.) 



a Gernian 

vessel 
a Belgian 

vessel 
some (^vessels) 

of the vessels 
are nanied 
, Cast/e Lineri 
t/ie /elter C 
on t/ie flag 
to 



IV. Boys' Amusements. 



amuse/nent 
[delight] 
of boys 
friend 
two boys 
Mark 
a boy 
four-teen 
year 



offourteen 
years, i.e. fourteen 
years old 
mihi io me 

praecipuus ckief especia/, 

particu/ar 
Caledonia Scot/and 

(puerl) oriundi {boys) sprung 
nobis puerls sunt to us boys t/iere 
are ( = \ve boys have ; 
cf. patruo meo est, §9) 
♦ Note the Ablative without 
'from ' ; cf. militia vacat. § 6 



condiscipulus 
hber scholis* 

amicitia 

una 

unda spumifera 

nato 

nimis 

(undae) asperae 

nos pueros 

ludus 

pila 

ut 

iuvat 

aedificare 

contra undas 



schoo/fe//ow 
freefrom 

/essoHS 
friends/iip 
toget/ier 
a foamy 'wavc 
I swim, bat/u 
too 

roug/i (waves] 
us boys 
game 
ba// [pill] 
how 

it de/ig/its 
to bui/d 
against t/ie 

waves 



For the forms in -are see 
§ 8 : spectare, to see. 

a Prepositi®n, here nieaning 



PREPARATIONS 



7» 



§13- 



plenae gaudiorum full o/joys 
a mane /ro»i morn 
usque ad vesperum rightontill eve 

[vespers] 
nunnumquam sometimes (lit. 


plerumque 

remigo 
do 


mostlv, gencr- 

aliy 
I row 
I set (cf. §5, 

give) 


Petrus 
adulescentulus 


not never) 
Peter 
a young man 


ventus asper 

guberno 

ministro 


a roiigh tvind 
Isteer [govern] 
/ altend 


vlgmtl 
remus * 
(scapha) apta 


twenty 
oar 

(a boat) /itted, 
adapted 


laudo 


[minister] 
I praise 


♦ Note the 


Dative meaning ' 


for ' {xtm\s, /or 


oars). 



Second Declension— (r^///'//«<'<;v/. 

NOUNS AND ADJECTIVES LIKE 'PUER* 

{Le., without the ending -us or -um in the Nom. Sing.) 



S/NGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 


puer, a boy 
puer, hoy 
puerum, a boy 
puerl, a boy's 
puerO, to a boy 
cum puerS, with a boy 


pueii, boys 
pueri, boys 
pueros, hoys 
puerorum, boys" 
pueiis, to hoys 
cum pueris, with boys 



There are not many nouns declined Hke ' puer.' Vesper, 
evening or evening star, is Uke it for the most part, but has no 
Plural. There are, however, a few adjectives (not many) dechned 
like 'puer' in both Singular and Plural, for instance : \\htr /ree ; 
miser, unhappy, miserable ; asper, rough ; spumifer, y6'fl//y, /oam- 
bearing and other words compounded of fer, bearing). 



72 



PREPARATIONS 



§ 14- i^ In tliis and the following rreparations the nouns of the 2nJ 
Declension Uke fucr will be given in the Nom. Sing., except whcn a whole 
phrase is quoled. 



conimemoralus 

Leir 
regulus 



locus p/ace 

fabula p/fiy, dratna, 

[fable] 
vientioned 
[commemorated] 
Lear 

ruier, petty 
king 
fortuna misera unhappy fate 

[miserable fortune] 
deploro / deplore, 

ia?nent 
stullitia foiiy 

culpo I biatne 

animus ingratus ijigratitude 

(lit. an Ufigrateful 
tnind) 
accuso • / accuse 

fortijna aspera harshfate 
filiae impiae unnaturai 

[impious] daughters 



constantia 
ex [loeta 
nominatus 



vir generosiis 

amicus fldus 

de scopulo 

se praccipitare 

paro 

filius suus 
virum servat 

perlculum 



constancy 
named after 
{/?-om) the 
poet; 
c. Shakspere^ s cli^ 
a ma?i of nobie 
birth, a nobieman 
[generoiis] 
a fait/iful 

friend 
doivn f?-om the 

ciiff 
to huri hiinseij 
[precipilate] 
I prepa?-e 
his ow?i son 
saves the ??ia?i 

[preserves] 
peril, da?tger 



Vir. 



SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 


vir, a man 
vir, mait 
virum, a man 
viri, a man^s 
virO, to a man 
cum viro, with a man 


viri, tnen 
viri, men 
viroa, men 
virOrum, mfn^i 
viria, to men 
cum viris, ^vith men 



There is no other word in Lalin e.xactly hke ' vir'; but 'Leir' 
is declined in the same way in some Laiin Histories of the 
TJritons. 



PREPARATIONS 



73 



§15- 

magister nostei 



V. Our Schoolmaster. 



vir doctus 
peritus ludorum 



our school- 
?naster, teacher 
a learned man 
skilled hi (lit. 
of) games 
carus (with Dat.) dcar {to) 
dextra right-hand 

magistrl nostrl our school- 
masters 
(dextra) valida (a) strong 

{right hand) 
lazy boys 
neither . . nor 
love the tnaster 
Sabidius 
(see note below) 
possum I can, I am 

ahle 
dicere (^rd Conj.) {to) say 



puen pign 
nec . . . nec 
magistrum amant 
Sabidl 



quare 

hoc tantum 
quia 

Ubros amant 
(hbros) Graecos 
(Ubros) Latlnos 
discipulus 
scholae nostrae 
atque 

scientiae raathe- 
maticae 



why 
this only 
because 

they love hooks 
Gj-eek {books) 
Latin {books) 
pupil [disciple] 
of our school 
and also 



magistro nosiro 
Hbrorum pulchr- 

orum 
schola nostra 
(schola) clara 



to our master 



offine books 
our school 
(rt) famous 
{school) 
hbrls to books 

in vlco nostro in our vilhige 
ludus hlterarius an elementary 
school (litterarius = where 
pupils are taught ' lit- 
terae,' cf. § 1 1). 'Schohi' 
means a more advanced 
kind of school 
creber puerls* croivded {filled) 
et pueUls with boys and 

,(;ir/s 
(creber) hberls zvith childrcn 
(Plural of the adjective 
hber, free : h'terally free 
ones, i.e. children of 
free-born parents) 
cum Alexandro withA/exander 
(cum) amlcls 
mels 



ad Ventam Del 
arum 



{wit/i) my 
friends 
at (or near) 
lP'inc/iester 
(Vcnta of ihe Belgae 
in Hampshire) 



mat/iematica/ 
sciences 

The lines quoted abovc (from the poet Martial, about a Roman 
called Sabidius) are the original of the following English verses: 
I do not like you. Dr. Fell ; 
The reason why I cannot tell. 
r>ut this one thing I know fuU well, 
I do not like you, Dr. Fell. 
*Note the Ablative without a Preposition, here meaning ' with.' 



74 PREPARATIONS 

Second Heelension—contiftued. 

NOUNS AND Adjectives like ' magister.' 



S/NGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 


magister, a master 
magister, o master 
magistrum, a master 
magistri, a master's 
magistrS, io a master 
cum magistro, with a master 


magistrl, masters 
magistrl, o masters 
magistros, masters 
magistrSrum, masters' 
magistris, to masters 
cum magistris, with masters 



Most nouns and adjectives of the 2nd Declension in er are 
declined like ' magister ' : liber, book ; Alexander, Alexander ; 
noster, oiir ; piger, lazy ; creber, crowded ; and many others. 

These words differ from ' puer ' only in dropping the e in all the 
Cases except the Nominative and the Vocative. 



Uses of the Forms of Adjectives. 

It will have been seen that the form of ilie adjective depends 
on the form of the noun to which it belongs. Thus we have had: 

magnz^i' numer«j, § 7 magnfl audaci^, § 2 magnww castell«w, §10 

scopulwi' alb/zj, § 8 casa alb^, §3 \c\um alb«w, § 11 

numm?/j antIqu?/5, §9 specula antiqua, §10 oppidura antiqu;////, §9 

\)dXxViUS me«5, §6 amita mea, § i 

vir doctwi, § 15 

liber Latinwi', § 15 

ventMi- asper, § 13 forti"ma aspera, § 14 

It is clear, then, that there are many more forms of the 



PREPARATIONS 



75 



adjective ihan of the noiin ; for each of the above adjectives has 
three forms of the Nominative Caser--^ 



(omitted in some ad- 
jectives hke 'asper') 

Similarly we may arrange nouns in three classes : 

Nouns which take 

adjectivesin us{ox 

those like 'asper') 
numerus 
nummus 
patruus 
vir* 
liber* 
etc. 

*Note that in these cases thc ending of the noun is not the same as that of 
the adjective which goes with it. 

To these three classes of nouns it is convenient to give names, 
nouns of the first class are called 7nascii/ine, those of the second 
class are cMed /efn/nine, tliose of the third ckiss are called ncu/er. 
And the forms of the adjective taken by ihe diffcrent ckasses of 
nouns are called by the same namcs. 

In order to know to which class a noun belongs (and thcrcfore 
which form of the adjective it takes), observe the Ibllowing rulcs: — 

Nouns of the Ist Declension are feminine, except those denoting 
male persons, which are mascuhne : thus insi//a, casa, ora, 
amita, are feminine ; agrico/a, nauta, pocta, inco/a, are 
mascuhne. 

Nouns of the 2nd Declension ending in us or r are masculine : 
e.g. numerus, scopu/us, patruus, /iber, vir. Some exceptions 
will be found later. 



Nouns which take 


Nouns which take 


adjeclives in -a 


adjectives in -unt 


audacia 


castellum 


casa 


vjlum 


specula 


oppidum 


amita 


etc. 


fortuna 




etc. 





Nouns of the 2nd Declension ending in um are neuter. 



76 



PREPARATIONS 

Table of thf, Forms of Adjectives. 



SJNGULAR 






PLURAL, 




masc. 


/em. 


neut. 


masc. 


/em. 


r.eui. 


1 


magnus 


magna 


magnum 


magni 


magnaa 


magna 


2 


magne 


magna 


magnum 


magni 


ma^nae 


magua 


3 


magnum 


magnam 


magnum 


magno3 


maguas 


magna 


4 


magni 


magnae 


magni 


magnorum 


magnarum 


magnorum 


5 
6 


magno 
magno 


magnae 
magna 


magnS 
magno 


1 magnis 


magnis 


magnis 


1,2 


asper 


aspera 


asperum 


asperi 


asperae 


aspera 


3 


asperum 


asperam 


asperum 


asperoi 


asperas 


aspera 


4 


asperi 


asperae 


aspen 


asperorum 


asperarum 


asperorum 


5 
6 


asperS 
aspero 


asperae 
aspera 


asperS 
asperd 


l asperis 


asp eris 


asperis 


1,2 


noster 


nostra 


nostrum 


nostri 


nostrae 


nostra 


3 


nostrum 


noBtram 


nostrum 


nostros 


nostrSs 


nostra 


4 


nostri 


nostrae 


nostri 


nostrorum 


nostrSrum 


nostrorum 


5 
6 


nostro 
nostro 


nostrae 
nostra 


nostro 
nostro 


1 nostris 


nostris 


nostris 



PrEPOSITIONS HITHERTO FOUND WITH THE AbLATIVE. 



ab ora maritima, §i. 

CUm nauti's, §2. 

de vita, §io; de scopulo, §14. 

ex fenestris, §3. 



in ( = in) : in Africa, § 6. 
{ = on) : in arena, §2. 
SUb ( = under) : sub umbra, § i. 



PrEPOSITIONS HITHERTO FOUND WITH THE ACCUSATIVE. 

inter fCnTis, §2. 

post ccnaui, §3. 
prope silvam, §3. 
SUper oceanum, § 7. 



ad silvam, § 5. 

ante ianuam, §1. 

apud amitam meam, §5. 

circum villam, § 6, 

in ( = into or to) : in Africam, §11 



PREPARATIONS 



77 



VI. Ancient Britain. 



§i6. 



S.-^" In this anJ the following Preparalions all nouns and adjectives of 
thc ist and 2nd Deciensions will be given in the Nom. Sing., except when a 
whole phrase is qiioted. 



hisloricus, a, um 


historical 


silva Anderida 


tJie Andreds- 


siudiosus, a, um 


fond, siudiotis 




weaid 


narro 


Itell,I fiarraie 




{weaid={Q)X&%i) 


proximus, a, um 


nearest 


vastus, a, um 


wiid, waste 


proximo anno* 


last year 




[vast] 


dum 


ivJiile 


incu'tus, a, uin 


uncuitivafed 


crat 


tvas {he 2vas) 


fera 


zviid heast 


narrabat 


he used fo ieil 


lupus 


woif 




or fiarrafe 


Utsus 


bear 


auscultabnnt 


{fhey) used fo 


ccrvus 


sta^ 




iisfen 


ai)er + 


wiid boar 


ad-cram 


I used to be 


mullus, a, un 


niuch 




present 


varius, a, um 


varied 


sic 


SJ, thus, as 


matcria 


timber 




foiiows 




[tiiaterial] 


fere 


aiinost 


fagus (fcin.) 


beech 


totus, a, um 


wJ:o!e [total] 


K^Most 


nouns denoting 


tola Llritannia 


tJie zvhoie of 


trees are f 


cminine 




Britain 


notus, a, um 


knoivn 


The 


adj. totus.a, um 


si 


\f 


is irregular in the 


Gaius Itihiis 


i.e. Caesar 


Gen. 


and Dat. Sing. 


verus, a, um 


true 


densus, a, um 


dense, tJiicJi 


vera (neut. pl.) 


true tJiings, tJie 


fluvius 


river 




trufh 


Tatncsa t 


TJuimes 


afifirmo 


lajfrm,! sfafe 


ager+ 


ficid 


pTnus (fem.) 


fine 


frQgifcr, frugifera 


fruifful 


Scoticus, a, um 


ScottisJi 


frugiferum 


[fruit-bcaring] 


de-crat 


was wanting 



*Note the Ablative without a Preposition, here meaning 'in' 
(time when), cf. § lo secundo sacculo. f Tacitus calls the river 
'Tatnesa;' Caesar calls it 'Tamesis' (^rd Decl.). 
\ Declined like magister. 



78 



PREPARATIONS 



§17- 

liber, llbcra, liber- 
um free 

With Abl.;cf. §6, §12 

metallum nietal 

multl, ae, a many 

abundabat abounded 

With Abl. 
plumbum album white lead 

i.e. tin 
ferrum iron 

atque and moreover 

Tacitus Tacitus, 

a Roman historian 
Zold 



aurum 

argentum 

margarita 

ostrea 

dabat 

parvus, a, um 

praeclarus, a, um famous 

caehmi sky, climate 

tum quoque then too, i.e. 

just as now 
creber, crebra, 

crebrum frequent 



silver 
pearl 
[Margaret] 
oyster 

gave, yieldcd 
small 



pluvia* rain 

nebula cloud 

ater, atra, atrum dark 
foedus, a, um hideous 
prulna frost 

ab-erant were absent 

natura nature 

piger, pigra, pigr- 

um sluggish 

testimonium testimony 

nauta Romanus see §15 (Rule 
of Genders) 



inquit 
vix 

pot-erant 
-ne 

an 

satis 

impiger, impigra, 
impigrum 



says he 

scarxely, hardly 
were able 
marks a qucs- 

tion 
(?r (in a ques- 

tion) 
sufficientty, 

enough 

active (ht. not 
sluggish) 



•Note the Ablative withouta Preposition, here meaning 'with': 
pluviis foedum, hideous with rains. Coinpare § 15, creber pueris, 
crotvded with boys. 



PREPARATIONS 



§i8. 








incola antiquus 


seep.75(Rule 


flavus, a, um 


yellow 




of Genders) 


mcmbrum 


limb [member] 


ferus, a, um 


savage 


robustus, a, um 


stnrdy, robust 


bellicosus, a, um 


warlike 


Caledonius 


Caledonian 


erant 


were 


Cambria 


Wales 


hasta* 


spear 


coloratus, a, um 


sufi-burnt 


sagilta 


arrotv 




[colouied] 


essedum 


chariot 


statura 


height, stature 


inter se 


aiiiong them- 


niger, nigra, 






selves, with 


nigrum 


black [nigger] 




one another 


universT, ae, a 


all 


pugnabant 


t/iev used to 




[universal] 




fight 


vitrum 


woad (blue 


proelium 


bat-tle 




colouring 


delectabant 


used to delight 




niatter) 


dlversus, a, um 


diverse, differ- 


colorabant 


iised to colour 




ent 


hodiernus, a, um of the present 


populus 


tribe [a people] 




day 


Celta 


Celt 


vestlmentum 


gannent 


slcut 


as (lit. so as, 




[vestment] 




just as) 


corium 


skin 


Germanus 


Gerinan 


con-stabant 


tised to con-sist 


capillus 


Jiair 







Note Ablative without Preposition (hastis, 7vith spears). 



Past Imperfect Tense of 'sum 


and Ist Conjug-ation 


ist Person 
2nd Person 
3rd Pkrson 


SINGULAR. 

eram, I ivas 

erSs, thou wast (you were) 

erat, he (she, it) zvas 


PLURAL. 
erfimuB, we were 
erStis, you were 
erant, they were 


ist Person 
2nd Person 
3rd Person 


spectSbam, / -> ^ 
spectSbSs, you l ^ 
gpectabat, he(she, it)] % 


spectabamua, we -\ ^ 
spectabatis, yju J-5 
spectSbant, they J "c 



The verb 'do,' / give, has the first a short in the Past Im- 
perfect : dibam, dibas, dibat, dibamus, dibatis, dSbant. 



8o 



PREPARATIONS 



§19. 

KS" In this and the foUowing Preparations the verbs of the ist Con- 
jugation Present or Past Imperfect Tense will be given in the ist Person Sing. 
of ihe Prescnt. 



hTc 


here^ at tliis 


GalHa 




Gaul 




point 


in (with Acc.) 


to, into 


nonne 


not ? ( = non H- 


causa* 




for the sake 




ne ; cf. ver- 


frumentum 




corn 




umne, §17) 


armentum 




herd 


ille 


/le {i.e. the 


catulus 




dog 




teacher) 


venaticus, a. 


um 


hunting 


aedifico 


I build, §12 


servus 




slave 


loca (neuter) 


plural of 'locus 


captlvus 




captive 




(masc.) place 


exporto 




I eyport 


fiimatus, a, um 


fortified 


frenum 




bridle 


quintus, a, um 


fifth 


vitrea (neut. 


pl.) 


glass vessels 


Bellum Gallicum 


the Gallic War 
(nameofone 


gemma 




gcni prccious 
sto?ie 




of Caesar's 


ceterl, ae, a 




the others, the 




works) 






7-est 


muiti (masc.) 


maiiy (j>eopk) 


cetera (neut.) 


the othertJiings, 


puto 


Ifa?ic}\ think 






Eng. 'etcetera 


itaque 


therefore, 


importo 




/ ifnport 




accordingly 


mediocricer 




mode?-ateIy, 


plane 


altogether 






tolerably 


barbarus, a, um 


barl>arotiS 


humanus, a, 


um 


civilized 


agrl cultfira 


agriculture 






[humane] 




(cultivation 


nec 




a?id ?iot 




of the land) 


multum 




viuch, very 


etiam 


even, also 


dlversus a 




different froin 


mercatura 


cojnmerce 


a = ab, §1 








[merchandize] 


Galll 




thc Gauls 


Venetl 


a tribe on the 








west coast of Gaul 









•Note the Ablative without a Prcposition, hcre meaning 'by': 
causa, hterally by cause or by reason ; hence for the sake. 



PREPARATIONS 



8i 



§20 



mortui 


the dead 


sacer, sacra, 




cremo 


I burn 


sacrum 


sacrcd 


sepulchrum 


tomb 


sacra (neut. pl.) 


sacrcd ritei 




[sepulchre] 




cf. vera, §i6; 


urna 


urn 




mediterranea 


pulchre 


beautifully 


Druidae (masc.) 


Druids 


ornatus, a, um 


ornamented 


saevus, a, um 


savage, cruel 


fabricare 


to mamifacturc 


femiiia 


xcoman 




[fabricate] 


pro victimls 


instead of 


in-humanus, a, 


um un-civilized 


(Abl.) 


victims, 


rota 


wheel 




as victims 


ferriitus, a, um 


fitted with iron 


sacrifico 


I sacrifice 


animl causa 


for the sake of 


miser, misera. 






ainusement 


miserum 


unhapfy, 




(Ht. oftfu mind) 




?niserable 


esca 


food, eating 


crucio 


I torture 


medilerranea 




trucldo 


I slaughter 


(neut. pl.) 


Midlands 


simulacrum 


image 




(midland 


plenus, a, uni 


filled (with ihe 




parts; cf 


Abl.); or///// (with the 




vera, §i6) 


Gcn.), § 


13. §16. 


humo 


/ bury ■ 


discordia 


quarrgl 


ferlna* 


flesh of wild 




[discord] 




animals. 


inter se 


see § 18 : inter 




game 




se pugnabant 


victito 


I live 


victoria 


victory 


deus 


god 


parabant 


say prepared 


fanum 


shrine 




the way for 


htcus 


grove 







*Note the Ablative without a Preposition, here meaning 'by 
means of ' : ferin;x victitabant, they lived on ( = by means of) game. 

Summary of meanings of the Ablative without a Preposition: 
from (§6, §12) ivith (jgi^, 17, 18, 20 after plena) 

at (§9) by (§19) 

in (§ 10, §i6) by means <)/"(§ 20) 

6 



S2 



PREPARATIONS 



VII. Footprints of thc Romans. 

§21. I^ From this point onwards the a of the Ablative Singular, 
Declension, is not distinguished by the long mark in the text. 



nuper 


recently, lately 


ambulabitis 


yoti will walk 


me-cum 


zvith me 


nobls-cum 


with us 


delectabit 


it will delight 


ego vero 


I ifideed 


inquam 


I say 


ambulabo 


will walk 


visitare 


to visit 


te-cum 


with thee, with 


sto 


I stand 




you 


monstra 


shoiv 


niihi 


io me 


nobls 


to us 


pergratus, a, um 


very pkasing 


amabo te 


please (lit. / 


nioiistrabis 


you 7vill sho7V 




shall loveyori) 


festlna lente 


hasten slo7vly 


ruTnae (pltir.) 


rieins 


i.e. 


dontgo too jfazi 


Rutuplnus, a, um 


belonoing to 


nullus, a, um (ir 


- 




Richborough 


regular in Gen. 


tum 


then 


and Dat. Sing.^ 


710 1 any 


longus, a, um 


long 


disputo 


I dispute 


aliquando 


some day 


quota hora 


at zvhat Jiour, 


monstrabo 


I will show 




at 7vhat cfclock 




{them) 


paratus, a, um 


prepared, ready 


cras 


to-morrow 


erilis 


you ivill be 


vobls 


to you 


quinta hora 


at thefifth hout 


gratus, a, um 


pleasitig 


i.e. ( 


it eleven dclock 


erit 


it will be 


inquiunt 


they say 


amlnilabimus 


we shall tvalk 







§22. 

postrldie 
serenus, a, um 
ientaculum 
dabitis 

vos in \\zxvi. 



cenare 



on the next day 
clcar [serene] 
breakfast 
ivill you give 
yourselves to 
the road 
i.e. will you start 

to siip, to dine 
from ceno, I sup 



pot-eritis 
Uubrls* 
adventabunt 
intra duas 

horas 
ambulare 
pot-erimus 
iinus,a,um(irre2; 



willyou be ablt 
from Dovcr 
will arrive 
within tivo 

hours 
to 'iValk 
wc shall be ablt 
one 



inG. &D.Sing.) 



PREPARATIONS 



83 



red-anibulabimus tve shall ivalk 

back 

decimus, a, um tetith 

undecimus, a, um eleventh 

doml at home 

spero / hope 

ieiunus, a, um huNgry 

trimus shall we be 



nihil 

gustabimus 

prandium 

vobis-cum 

portate 

crustulum 

pomum 

curabo 



nothing 

we shall iasle 

liinch 

with yoii 

carry 

cake 

apple 

will provide 



*Note the Ablative without a Prcposition, here meaning 'from.' 
RuLE. — Names of Towns take no Prepositions to exprcss the 
mcaning ' from ' or ' to ' with a verb of * going.' 



Future Tense of 'sum' and Ist Conjugation. 



ISt 


Person 


2nd 


Person 


3rd 


Person 


ISt 


Person 


2nd 


Person 


Srd 


Pbrson 



SINGULAR. 
era, / shall be 
eris, thou will be 

{yoti will be) 
erit, /le (she, it) will be 



•pectabO, / shall see 
■pectabifl, thou zvilt see 
(you will see) 
■pectSbit, he (ske, it) willsee 



PLURAL. 
erimua, we shall be 
eritis, you will be 

erunt, they will be 



spectabiiuus, we shall see 
epectabitis, you will see 

spectSbunt, they will see 



NoTE. — The verb ' do,' I give, has the a short in the Futurc : 
dabo, dabis, dabit, dabimus, dabitis, dabunt. Also in 'dare,' to 
give ; and see notes on §5 and §18. 



Imperative of Ist Conjug-ation. 



2nd Person. 



SINGULAR. 
■pect&, see (thoti) 



PLURAL. 
■pectSte, see (ye) 



84 



PREPARATIONS 



§23- 

tS" In ihis anJ the following Preparationsnew verbs of the ist Conjugation, 
Future or Imperative, will be given in the ist Pers. Sing. of the Present. 



appropiiKiuo 

cupide 

exspecto 

ad sonum 

tintinnabulum 

properavl 

ecce 

ad ianuam 

intraverunt 

exclamavimus 

euge 

opportune 

adventavistis 



sero 



/ approach 

eagerly 

I expect 

at thi sound 

bell 

I hastened 

beJiold 

at the door 

they entered 

ive exclaimed 

bravo ! 

in the nick of 
ii7ne [opportunely] 

yoii have 
arrived 

marks a ques- 
tion, like 
whether 

late 



adventavimus ice have 

arrived 
fere almost 

tertius, a, um third 
fuit it was 

nos dedimus* we gave our- 

s»lves 
celeriter quickly 

non pot-est is not abie, can 

not 
fatigatus, a, um //>!?(/ [fatigued] 
quota hora est ? wh(it o^clock is 

itl 
noiidum not yet 

ad ambulandum for wa/king 
nos vero that we are ! 

(parati sumus) (cf. §21) 
bene ambulate lit. ivalk 7cell, 

i.e. good bye 



*It is well for the pupil lo realize from the first that there is no Conjugalion 
in which all the verbe form their Perfect Stems in the same way. Such 
forniations as ' dedi' are irregular only so far as the Stem is concerned. 



§24. 



inter viam 


on the way 


propinquus, a, um ncighbouring 


multa 


many tliings 


paravit 


Jie preparcd 


de (with Abl.) 


about 


quinquagesimus 


1 


narravit 


toid [narrated] 


a, uin 


fiftieth 


prlmus, 0, um 


first (for Abl. 


copiae (plural) 


forces 




cf. §10) 


transportavit 


he transported 


ante Chr. natum 


cf §10 


navigavit 


/le sai/ed 


bello 


/ wage zvar 


quo 


w/iit/ier, to 


postquam 


after, when 




ivhic/i 


Nervii 


a tribe in 


appHcavit 


/le brought to 




Bel:i;ium 




land 


de-bellavit 


he defeated 


diu 


tong 


contra (with Acc. 


) against ' 


disputaverunt 


/uive disputed 



PREPARATIONS 



85 



ad navigia 
applicanda 

idoneus, a, um 

Dubras* 

armatus, a, um 

alius (irregular in 
declension) 

fuerunt 

per (with Acc.) 

properaverunt 

pugna 

ad pugnam 



for vesseis to be 
broiighi to latid 

fitted, siiitable 
to Dover 
armed 

another 
were 
along 
hastened 
fight, batt/e 
for battle 



paraverunt {they) prepared 

se theviselves 

necesse tiecessary 

Romanls (Dat.) for the Ro- 
nians 



ad ancoras de- 
ligare 

vadum 
cquitaverunt 



tofasten to 
atichors, 
to anclior 

shai/ow p/ace 

they rode 



copiam dedeiunt they gave an 
opportunity 



*The Accusative of the naaiie of a Town without a Prepositon 
sometimes means 'to — '; cf. Rule, §22. 



Perfect Tense of 'sum' and Ist Conjug-ation. 



ist Person 
2nd Person 

3rd Person 



ist Person 
2nd Person 

3rd Person 



SINGULAR. 
fui, I was 
fuuti, thou wast 

(you were) 
fuit, he {she, it) was 



spectaTi, I saw 
spectSvisti, thou sawest 

(yoii saw) 
spectavit, he (she, it) saw 



PLURAL. 
fuimus, we were 
fuistis, yoH were 

fuerunt, they were 



spectavimus, we saw 
spectSvistis, you saw 

spectaverunt, they saw 



NoTES. I. — The Perfect may often be translated I /lave been, 
I /lave seen, etc. ; virl docti disputaverunt, /earned ?ncn /lave 
disputed. 

2. — The verbs ' do,' / give, and ' sto,' / stand, unHke other 
verbs of thc ist Conjugation, mnke the Perfects ' dcd-i,' / gave, 
' sici-i,' / stood ; but ihe endings (-1, -isti, -it, -imus, -istis, -erunt) 
iire the same as in other Perfects ; thus ' dcd-erunt,' they gave. 



86 



PREPARATIONS 



§2S 

i^ In this anil the follouing Preparations new verbs of the ist Conj., 
Perfect Tense, will be given in the ist Person Singular of the Present. 



adventaveramus 


we had arrived 


nisi 


uniess, if . . noi 


hlc 


here 


ignavus, a, um 


coivardly 


campus 


the plain 


certe 


at any raie 


apertus, a, um 


open 


officium 


duty 


ad copias 


for forces 


praesto 


I perforvi 


explicandas 


io be deployed 


congregaverant 


had gathered 


illlc 


yonder 


impigre 


activeiy, 


fortasse 


perhaps 




bravely 


piscatorius, a, um 


fishing 


confusus, a, um 


confused 


deligaverat 


had fastefied 


primo 


atfirst 


col-locaverant 


had placed 


laboro 


I iabour, am in 




[located] 




difficuliies 


incitaverant 


had urged 


tandem 


at iength 




[incited] 


propulso 


I drive o(f 


reliquus, a, um 


the rest 


occupo 


Iseize [occupy] 


dubito 


I hesitate 


fuga 


flight 




[doubt] 


dederant 


had given 


aquili-fer 


the eagk-bearer 


numquam 


never 


aquila 


the eagle 


antea 


before 


congrego 


I gather [con- 
gregatej 


steterant 


had stood 




laudandus, a, um laudable 



Pluperfeet Tense of 'sum' and Ist Conjugation. 



ist Person 
2nd Person 

3rd Person 



ist Person 

20(1 l'ERSON 

3rd Person 



SINGULAR. 
fueram, / had been 
fueras, thou hadst been 
{you had been) 
fuerat, he {she, it) had been 



apectaveram, / had seen 
BpectaTera», thou hadst seen 

{you had seen) 
spect&verat, he {she, ii) had 
seen 



PLURAL. 
fueramm, we had been 
fueratis, you had been 

fuerant, they haJ been 



Bpectaveramua, we haJ seen 
spectaTeratis, you had seen 

spectayerant, they had seen 



PREPARATIONS 



87 



§26. 

iS" After this Preparation new verljs of the ist Conjugation, Pluperfect 
Tense, wili be given in the ist Person Singular of the Present. 



postulo 


/ demand 


satiatus, a, um 


stitisfied 


septimus, a, um 


seventh 


mora 


dc/ay 


ruber, rubra, rub 


r- 


fuerit 


will have been 


um 


red 


quando 


when 1 


recreavermius 


we shall have 


per (with Acc.) 


throii^h, during 




refreshed 


quinque 


five 


nos 


oiirselves 


alter, altera, 


a second, an- 


domum 


hofnetvards. 


alterum 


other 




home 


(irregular in Gen 




adventaverimus 


ive shall have 


and Dat. Sing 


) 




arrived 


recreavero 


I shall have 


interea 


meamvhile 




refreshed 


mi Antonl 


my {dcar) 


me 


ffiyself 




Ajithonv 


cachinno 


I laugh 


exspectaverit 


ivill have 
expected 


mox 


soon 



Future Perfect of 'sum' and Ist Conjugation. j 


SISGULAR. 
fuero, / shall have been 
fuerifl, thoii ivilt have been 
{you will have been) 
fuerit, he {she, it) ■will have been 


PLURAL. 
fuerimUB, we shmll have been 
fueritis, you wilt have been 

fuerint, they will have been 


BpectSverS, / shall have seen 
spectaTeriB, thou wilt have seen 
{you ivill have seen) 
gpectSverit, ke (she, it) will have seen 

1 


spectSverimus, we shall have seen 
spectSveritis, you will have seen 

apectSverint, they will have seen 



88 



PREPARATIONS 



VIII. First expedition of C. Julius Catsar. 

§27- i^Fion» this point onwards all new vcrbs of the ist Conjugation 
will be given in the ist Person Singular of the Prescnt. 



expeditio 


expedition 


inquimus 


we say 


Caesaris* 


of Caesar 


proconsul 


proconsiil 


calor 


heat 


ties 


three 


solis 


of the sun 


nationes 


tribes [nations] 


aeris 


of the air 


duodesexagesim 


- ffty eighth, lit. 


neque 


nor{and . . not) 


us, a, um 


2 froni 6oth 


paulo post 


a little after 


Caesarem pro- 


had created 


solem obscCirav- 




consulem cre- 


Caesar pro- 


erunt 


obscuredthesun 


averant 


C07lSul 


imber 


a shower 


autem 


however 


sol 


tJie sun 


esse 


to be 


splendore f 


with splendour 


ex-istimo 


I consider 


iterum 


a second time 
had tempered 




[estima te] 


calorem temper- 


revera 


really 


averat 


the heat 


ex nationibus 


of the tribes 


de Caesare * 


about Caesar 


auxilium 


/le/p, aid 


imperatore 


general 


auxilia (plur.) 


auxiliaries 




[emperor] 


subministro 


I supply 


interrogo 


/ ask, enquire 


Trinobantes 


a British tribe 


ciar 


why 




in Essex 


expedltionem 


hc prepared his 


Cassi, 2 


a tribein Herts 


suam paravit 


expedition 


imploro 


/ iviplore 



* The lelter C before Julius Caesar stands for Gaius (Gdiuiii, Gdi, Gdio). 
tNote ihe Ablative wilhout a Preposition, here meaning ' with' ; c/- §i5i 17, 20. 

Third Declension. 
NouNS LiKE 'Caesar,' ' Expeditio,' etc. 



SIXGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 


Caesar, Caesar 
Cassar, Caesar 
Caesar-em, Caesar 
Caesar-is, Caesat^s 
Caesar-i, to Caesar 
cum Caesar-e, with Caesar 


Caesar-es, Caesars 
Caesar-es, Caesars 
Caesar-es, Caesars 
Caesar-um, 0/ Caesars 
Caesar-ibus , to Caesars 
cum Caesar-ibus, with Caesais 



PREPARATIONS 



89 



So are declined words like 'aer,' air, 'sol,' sun^ and niany 
words ending in or, such as 'calor,' heat, 'splendor,' s/^Ietidour, 
'imperator,' commande?--in-chief. So too are declined words like 
'expeditio,' expedition, excfpt that they havc dropped an ' n ' in 
the Nominative Singular : thus we have — ■ 



.SINC.ULAR. 

1, 2 expeditio 

3 expeditidn em 

4 expedition is 

5 expedition I 

6 in expedition e 



PLURAL. 
expedition es 
expedition es 
expcditionum 
expedition ibus 
in expedition-ibus 



(Many words ending in 0, especially those ending in ^/J and gOi 
have also a change of vowel in the stem : see next section, note). 

Nouns of the ^rd Declension in io, do, or go are nearly all 
feminine, except when they denote male persons. The other 
nouns decHned hke Caesar are mostly masculine, especially those 
endins: in or. 



venia pardon 

a victor-ibus from the victors 
ullus, a, um any 

(irregular in Gen. 

and Dat. Sing.) 
nisi except ; cf. § 35 

paucl, ae, a afeiv 

proximus, a um next ; cf. § 16 
miilto maior-em much greater, 
lit. grcater 
by much 
sescentl, ae, a six hundred 
onerarius, a, um of burden 
legion-es legions 

cum multi- with a jnu/ti- 

liidin-e* tudi 



§28. 




avaritia 


avarice 


exspectatio 
praeda 
cupidus, a, um 


expectation 
booty ; cf. § 7 
desirous 


vlsitandi 


of visiling 


explorandl 
ignotus, a, um 


of exploring 
unknoivn 


remotus, a, um 


remote 


ignotum 

pro (with Abl.) 


an unknown 

thing 
for, instead of 



pro magnifico est is regarded as a 

magjiificent 

ihing 
com-par5 -^ g^^ together 

re-porto I carry ojf 

* Niite that thc stcm of this word diffcrs from the Numinative Singular iiot 
only in having an n, but also in ihe change of vowel : Nominative Singular 
tnullitudo, stem mulliluJin-. 



90 



PREPARATIONS 



IX. Pcace violated. 

^ 29. tS' In the followini^ Preparation each new noun of the ^rd declension 
will bs given only once (in ihe Nominalive Singular, wiih the stem added in 
brackets whenever it differs from the Neminative Singular). 



pax (pac-), 3 
violalus, a, uni 
violo 

aestas (aestat-), 3 
quartus, a, um 
dux (duc-), 3 
niiles (milit-), 3 
eques (equit-), 3 
tempestas 

(tempestat-), 3 
medius, a, um 
navigatio (naviga- 

tion-), 3 
non iam flabat 
piospere 

labor (labor-), 3 



feace 
violated 
I violate 
summcr 
fourth 
leader [duke] 
J(?/i'//(?r[mili!ary] 
horse-soldier 
weather 

[tempest] 
jiiid * 
Toyage [naviga 

tion] 
no longer blexv 
successfiiilj, 

prosperously 
labour. toil 



remigandi of rowi?ig 

virtus (vittut-), 3 piuck [virtue] 
magnopere greatly 

(cf. quantopere how ffiuch) 
prior (prior-), 3 /ohfter 
inde thence 

trecenti, ae, a three hufidred 
castra t, 2 caftip 

statio(station-),3 station 

in stalione on guard 
reservo / reserve 

periculosus, a, um dangerous 
defensor (defen- defetider 

sor-), 3 I 
nudare to strip (cf. 

incitare, to urge on : 
spectarc, §8; § 12) 



* In media navigatione, literally in midvoyage ; but we should generally say 
in EngUsh ?'« the tniddle of the voyage. 

t A neuter phiral noun of the 2nd declension, with singular meaning. 

JXote the Ablative wilhout a Prcposition, properly meaning ' from,' but 
here to be translated by ' of ' ; so in § 12 and § 6 we might translate lii>er scholit 
* free ^T/lessons,' and niililid vacat ' he is free (T/service.' 

Third Declension— ^-^/'///^/^«f.f^. 

NouNS LiKE ' Pax,' ' Aestas,' etc. 
A great many nouns of the ^rd Declension differ from those 
aheady learned by addifig afi s to the Noinifiatii;* Singu/ar ; thus 
from the stem 'pac-' we get the Nominative Singular 'pac-s' 
(written with the letter x for cs) ; but the other cases are formed 
from the stem ' pac-.' When the stem ends in a / (or d), this lettcr 
disappears in the Nominative Singular when the s is added, but 
not in the oilier cases. Thus we dcchne — 

1, 2 p5x aesta s niile-s virtil-s 

3 pac cni aestatem militem virtut-em 

4 pac-is aestat-is milit-is virtut-is 

etc. etc. etc. etc. 



PREPARATIONS 



91 



Nouns of ihe ^rd Declension that forni the Nominative 
Singular by adding s to the stem are mostly feminine, except 
those which denote male persons, hke 'miles,' so/cfur, and a few 
others. 



§30. 


X. Varied contests. 




certamen 


con/esi 


tempus 


time 


(cerlamin-), 3 * 




(tempor-), 3 * 


[tempor-ary] 


vlto 


I avoid 


agger, 3 


tnound 


fluwen 


river 


testudo (teslu- 


tortoise-she//^ 


(flumin-), 3* 




din-), 3 


shelter f 


egregie 


excellenily 


oppugno 


/ attack 


opus (oper-), 3 * 


work [oper-ate] 


vulnus 


woutid 


firmo 


/ strengthen 


(vulner-), 3 * 


[vulner able] 




[make firm] 


pondus 


weight 


nomen 


name 


(ponder-), 3* 


[ponder-able] 


(nomin-), 3* 


[nomin-ate] 


arma 


arms 


constat 


is known 


(neut. phir.). 


2 


domesticus, a um 


civil 


supero 


/ surpass 




[domestic] 


magnitudo 


size, magnitude 


prae-paro 


I prepare 


(magnitudin-). 


3 


arbor, 3, /f/«. 


tree 


robur 


sfrength 


vallum, 2 


rampart 


(robor-), 3 * 


[cor-robor-ate] 


pro-volo 


I dashforth 


corpus 


body 




cf volito, §7 


(corpor-), 3* 


[corpor-al] 


niunitio, 3 


l?n/wark 


homo(homin-), 3 


man 


ahquanlum 


a /ot, a consider 


robusto cor- 


of (ht. witJi) 




ah/e amoimt. 


porej 


robust body 



• The nouns in thk section in men, us, and ur are Neuters, and therefof" 
have the Accusative ihe same as the Nwininalive. Note, too, ike Nominalive 
and Accusative plurai in a. 

tThe testuJo was an arrangement of the shields of the soldiers when thcy 
atlackcii a fort ; it looked like a tortoisc-sheli. 

J Note the Ablative without a Prepositson, here translatable by 'of ; the 
AMative here dcnotes a qualily of the persons spoken of, and may be iherefore 
callcd an Adjectival AWative. 

Third Declension— rc«//««(r^. 

NouNS LiKE 'Flumkn,' ' Opus,' Tempus.' 
Ncutcrs ending in 7}ien have stems cnding in ;;////- from 
whit h the other cases are formcd. Neutcrs ending in us have stems 
in er- or or-. The last vowel of these stems is aiways short. 



PREPARATIONS 



Note that the Neuters have the Accusative the sanie as the 
Nominative, both in the Singular and in the Plural Number 
(as in 2nd Declcnsion), and that their Nominr.tive and Accusative 
Plural end in a (also as in the 2nd Declension). 



SING. 


PLUR. 


SING. 


PLUR. 


1, 2, 3 flumen 


flumin-a 


OpUB 


oper a 


4 fluruin is flumin-um 


oper-ia 


oper-um 


5 fiumin-i 


fltlmin-ibus 


oper-I 


oper-ibus 


6 in flumin e 


in flumin-ibus 


in oper-e in 


oper-ibus 


§31- 






pro-sum 


I a77i helpful, 


msectatio 


pursuit 




do good 


(-ion-), 3 




fugo 


Iput toflight 


revocare 


to recall 


fugatus, a, um 


rouied 


novus, a, uii 


new 


in-sto 


I pursue (Ut. 


arma (Neut. 


here fitiings 


(with Dat.) 


step upon) 


Pl., 2) 




ignoro 


I do not know 


ornandus, a, um 


to be equipped 




[ignore] 


(from orno 


I eguip, adorn 


praeterea 


besides 


magno opere 


»= tnagnopere. 


incommodum, 2 


disaster 


(Abl. of opus) 


§ 29 


nuntio 


I announce 


diurnus, a, um 


of the day 


tempestas( tat-), 3 


tetnpest 


nocturnus, a, um 


of the night 


litus (Utor-), 3 


coast 


sine (with Abl.) 


without 


affticto 


wreck [afllict] 


reparare 


to refit, repair 


§32. 


XI. Roman ships. 




genus (gener-;, 3 


kind [gener-al] 


octingentr, ae, a 


eighi hundred 


navis (Gen. Pl. 


ship [nav-y] 


hiems (hiem-), 3 


winter 


navium), 3 




inter 


here among 


navis longa 


ship of war 


ducentl, ae, a 


t2V0 hundred 


classis (Gen. Pl. 


fleet 


opus (with 


need iof) 


classium), 3 




Abl.) 




onus (oner-), 3 


l>urden[oner-ous] 


quomodo 


how 


transportandus, a, 


to be irans- 


hostis (Gen.Pl. 


enemy 


um 


ported 


hostium), 3 


[host-ile] 


ad onera trans- 


for burdens to 






IX)rtanda 


be transported 









PREPARATIONS 

Third DeeleTision— Co/i/tnued. 



93 



Most nouns of two syllables belonging to ihe ^rd Docl. and 
ending in is have the same form for the Genitive as for the 
Nominalive Singular, and form the Genitive Plural in u/m : thus 
'navis,' s/iip, ' classis,' /V^/, 'hostis,' ene77iy. These nouns are 
niostly feminine, except those denoting male persons, hke ' hostis.' 



SIKGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


], 2 
3 
4 
5 
6 


nSvis 
nSvem 

navia 
nSvI 
in nave 


nSvgg 
nSvgs 
navium 
nSvibus 
in naviuus 



Note that all these forms are of two' syllables except the 
Genitive, the Dative, and the Ablative of the Pkiral. The Gen. 
Plur. has one syllable more than the Nom. Sing., as in §§27-31. 

NoTE. — Similarly are declincd some nouns whose Nominative 
Singular ends in es, e.g., 'clades,' disaster. 



§33- 

ornare to equip 

forma, i Jorm, shape 

puppis, 3 • stern, poop 

accommodatus, a, suited [accom- 

um 
carlna, i 
planus, a, um 
robur (robor-). 
ferreus, a, um 
funis, 3 * 
pellis, 3 * 
slve . . . slve 



modated ] 
keel 

flat [plane] 
hcre oak 
viade 0/ iron 
rope 

skin, hide 
ivhether . . . 0/ 
propter(withAcc.) on account of 

* This word is tleclin 
+ The Roman ' tormentuni 



llnum, r:. 

quia 

phis . . quam 

firmitOdo 

■(-tudin-), 3 
llneus, a, um 
tam . . quam 
rostrum, 2 
turris, 3 * 
lamina, i 
quid opus 
tormcntum, 2 



flax 

because 

inore . . than 

firmness 

made of flax 
so . . as 
beak, ram 
turret 
plate 
what need 
a macliine for 
huTling stones t 



ed like ' navis,' § 32. 
corresponds to our cannon 



94 



PREPARATIONS 



§34- XII. Alliance of the British tribes. 

societas alliance flnis, 3 * end 

(societat-), 3 [society] fines, Plur., m. boundaries 

summus, a, um chief separ5 I separate 

imperium, 2 command oriens(orient-), 3 the East\ 

mando / entrust [orient-al] 

rex (reg-), 3 ki^ig occidens the IVest 

gens (gent-), 3 race [gentilc] (occident-), 3 [occident-alj 

Gen. PJ. gentium superior previous, past 

princeps (-cip- , 3 prince (superior-), 3 

tamen nevertheless conlinuus, a, um continued, un- 

pars (part), 3 part interrupted 

consocio I ally inftnltus, a, um infinite 

*Declined like ' navis,' § 32. 

t'aboriente' is WtexMy from the East ; hence on the East side, on the 
East. Similarly, 'ab occidente,' on the VVest. 

Third Declension — Continued. 

Words whose stem ends in two consonants form the Genitive 
Plural in iutn (two syllables more than the Nom. Sing.): thus 
'gens' (stem 'gent-') race, 'pars' ('part-'), /ar/. 

Notice that if the stem ends in a /, it is dropped before the s 
which is added to form the Nominative Singular, as in § 29 ; 
thus ' gens ' stands for ' gent-s ' ; ' pars ' for ' part-s.' 

The Nouns whose stem ends in two consonants are mostly 
feminme, hke other Nouns that form the Nominative Singular by 
adding s to the stem (§ 29). 



SIXGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1,2 
3 
4 
5 
6 


gen-8 
gent-em 
gent-is 
gent-I 
cnm gent-e 


gent-Ss 
gent Sb 
gent-ium 
gent-ibuB 
cum gent-ibus 



But 'urbs' (stem 'urb-'), city, which will be found in the next 
section, does not drop any letter before the s of the Nominative 
Singular ; it is only a / or a ^ that is dropped before ihe s. 



rKEPARATIONS 



95 



§35- 

caput (capit), 3, n. chapter 
duodecimus, a, uni tivelfth 
tertius decimus thirieenth 
interior (-ior-), 3 iiiierior 
Belgiuni, 2 JSel^i^ium 

ini m igro / ivtmigrate 

aetas (-tat-), 3 age 

trans (wiih Acc.'> across 
Khenus, 2 the Rhine 

migro I migrate 

urbs (urb-), 3 city [urb-an] 

derlvatus, a, um derivcd 

* C. § 27, 1. 16 esse existiniabant. 

§36. 

longitudo 

(-tudin-), 3 
circiter 

quingentl, ae, a 
milia, 3 (Neut. 

Plur. of ' miHe,' 

a thousand) 
septingentr, ae, a seven hundred 
octingentl, ae, a ei^ht hundrcd 
octogintfl eighty 



de-monstro 
orl-o (orlgin-), 3 
Iriquetrus, a, um 
esse declaro 
latus (later), 3 
Hispania, i 
septentriones 
erro 

Hibernia, i 
recte 
iudico 
Mona, I 



Ipoint out 
origin 
triangular 
Idec/are to be* 
side [later-al] 
Spain 
the A^orth f 
I err 
Ireland 
rightly 
I judge 
Anglesey 



t lit. ihe seve>i oxen (Charles Wain). 



XIII. The British seas. 

length 

[longitude] 
about 

five hundred 
mi/es, lit. thou- 
sands {pj paces) 



mare (Abl. Sing. the sea 

mari), 3, Ncut. 
di-stare to be distant 

igitur t/iere/ore, t/ien 

maria seas 

circum-do I surround 

Hibernicus,a,um Iris/i 
marium of t/ie seas 

usitatus, a, uni used, usua/, 
coinmon 



Third Declension— r^/'^/'/////^'^. 

Nouns ending in e like ' mare,' sea, of the ^rd Declension are 
Neuter. They form the Ge.nitive Plural in ium, the Nominative 
and Accusative Plucal in ia, and the Ablative Singular (like the 
Dative Singular) in t. Thus 



SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


1, 2, 3 mare 

4 maris 

5 mari 

6 in mari 


maria 
marium 
maribus 
in maribus 

1 



96 



PREPARATIONS 



§37- 


XIV. Britain subdued. 


pacatus, a, um 


siibdued 


ordo (-din-), 3 rank 


concursio (-ion-), , 


3 engagement 


[ordin ary] 




[ex-cursion] 


consulto on purpose 


iter (itiner-), 3 * 


march 


[by consultation 


fortiter 


l)}-avely 


essedarius, 2 charioleer 


impugno 


I attack 


pes (ped ), 3, m. foot 


cohors (cohort-), 


cohort 


pedibus onfoot 


3t 




ita thus 


sui 


iheir oivn me?i 


mobilitas (-tat-), 3 mobiliiy 


perturbo 


I perturb^ 


stabiUtas (-tat-), 3 stability 




ihrow inio 


pedes (pedit-), footsoldier 




confusion 


3t 


mos (mor-), 3 


custom 


praesto (cf. ^25 I exhibit 


iustus, a, um 


Just, proper 


huiusmodi of this kind 


omnes 


all 


intervallum, 2 interval 


*This is a very 


peculiar word ; tV 


e Nominalive Singular is noi formeil 



directly from the stem. 

t Declined like ' pars' (stem ' part- '), § 34. 

:[: Declined like 'mllea' (stem 'milit-'), 'eques' (stem ' equit-'), §29. 

§38. 



collis, 3* 


hill 


servo 




here 1 7vaich 


legatus, 2 


Ueutenant- 


paunum 




a little 




general [legate] 


decUno 




I turn aside 


subito 


suddenly 






[decline] 


superior (cf. ^ 


34) superior, victor- 


de via 




fiom ihe road 




ious 


vasto 




I lay ivaste 


quattuor 


four 






[de-vast-ate 




•Declined like ' na 


vis,' ' hostis,' § 3 


2 




§39- 










rfpa, I 


bank 


palOs (palfid 


), 3 


marsh 


sudis, 3 * 


stake 


oviSj 3 * 




sheep 


acutus, a, um 


sharp [acute] 


bos (bov-), 3 


t 


ox 


profundus, a, 


um rti^tY/ [profound] 


duabus 




Abl. o{ duae 


caput (capit-), 


3,n. head; cf. § 35 


expugno 




I takc hy stoi 11 


longe 


far 

* Declined like 


fugo 

' n.-ivis,' § 32. 




I put loflight 


tThisis an 


rrcgular word : bos, bo 


v-em, -is, i, e ; 


Gcn 


. Plu)-. l>o-uin. 



PREPARATIONS 



97 



§40. 








prae-suni (with 


/ am in com- 


dcfectio (-ion-), 3 


defection 


Diit.) 


mand 0/ 


condicio(-ion-),3 


condition 


pugnandl 


offishting; cf. 


dellbero 


I delibcrate 




. § 28, 1. 3 


veto 


Iforbid 


frustra 


in vain 


vexo 


I annoy, vex 


victores 


— zvere victors 


tributum, 2 


tribute 


clvitas (-tat-), 3 


state [city] 


impero 


I iinpose 


oro 


/ ask, entreat 


(Dat.) 


{itpon) 


confirmo 


I establisli 


obses (obsid-), 3 


hostage 




[connrm] 


pro (with Abl.) 


for, on bthalfof 


tot (indeclinable 


so many 




(cf. §§28, 33) 


adj.) 




ara, i 


altar 


clades, 3 * 


disastcr 


foCUS, 2 


hearth 


maxinie 


chiefly 


tropaeuni, 2 


trophy • 



* This and some olher nouns of the 3td Dcclensi',)n difier from ' navis ' only 
in ihe Nominative Singiilar ; see § 32 (Note). In ihese woids thc NominaLivt; 
and Accusalive Plural is the samo as the Nominative Singular. 



§41- 


XV. Hea 


rts of oak. 




aes (aer-), 3, n. 


brass 


digitus, 2 


finger [digit] 


triplex (triplic-), 


triple 


monstrans 


■ pointing 


3. adj. 




(monstrant-). 


3, adj. 


fortis, 3, adj. 


brave, strong 


statio (-ion-), 3 


here road- 


admlrabiiis,3,adj. 


admirable 




steadjd.^^g 


insigne, Neuter of 




tutus, a, um 


safe 


insignis, 3, adj. 


distinguished 


illae 


yon, those 


facinus (facinor-), 


deed, achieve- 


optime 


exce/ientiy, 


3 


ment 




here = hurrah 


quod 


that 


adiiuc 


hitherto{\\\\c = 


orbis, 3, m. 


circle [orb] 




hither, ad = to) 


orbis terrarum 


= the world 


grandis, 3, adj. 


big [grandj 


tam 


so (cf §33) 


per-grandis, 3, 


very bii{ 


mirus, a, um 


wonderful 


adj. 




sentcntia, i 


opinion 


omnis, 3, adj. 


every 


comprobo 


I approve of 


omnCs, PUir. 


all 


nonus, a, um 


ninth 


arici (ariel-),3,m 


. ram 



NOTE. — The heading (Robur et aes Iriplejc) is a quotation from Ilorace 
(Odes I. 3, 9) and is here applied bolh to the courage of the ancient liritona 
aml to the modein ships of war described in this seciion. 



98 



PKLrARATlONS 



§42. 



veteianus, a, um 


veteran, old 


prOpositum, 2 


proposal 


milito 


I ser-oe 


per-gratus, a, um 


very pleasing 


custos(custod-), 3 


guard 


ad navigandum 


for sai/ing 


Grandis, 3, adj. 


ihe Majestic 


denego 


Isay no [deny] 


Regalis, 3, adj. 


ihe Royal Sov- 


omnia, Neut. Pl. 


all things, 




ereign 


of omnis 


everything 


Magnifica, i, adj. 


the Aiagnificen t 


dulce, Neut. Sing 


. sweet, p/easant 


Tonans (Tonant-) 


ihe Thunderer 


ofdulcis, 3, ad_ 


■ 


3> adj. 




lenis, 3, adj. 


gent/e [lenient] 


Arrogans (Arro- 


the Arrogant 


brevl, Abl. Sing. 


drie/, short 


gant-), 3, adj. 




of brevis, 3. 




Ferox (Feroc-), 3, 


the Furious 


adj. 




adj. 


lit. warlike 


classiaril, 2 


seajnen, mcn oj 


tegimen (-min-), 3 


covering 




thefleet 


in GrandT 


in the Majestic 


ingens (ingent-), 


huge 


(Abl. of Grandis) 


3. adj. 




praefectus classis 


adfniral 


machina 


niachine 


cur 


why 







Adjectives of the Third Declension. 

Adjectives of the ^rd Declension in is are decUned : — 

(i) in the Masculine and Feminine hkc ' navis ' (§32), 

except that the Ahlative Sing-ular ends in i (not -e) : 
(2) in the Neuler Hke ' mare ' (§ 36). 



SINGULAK. 


PLURAL. 

1 


1, 2 
3 
4 
5 
6 


masc. and/cm. neul. 

fortis forte 
fortem forte 
fortis fortis 
forti forti 
forti forti 


niasc. and/ein. neut. 

fortes fortia 
fortes fortia 
fortium fortium 
fortibus fortibus j 
fortibus fortibus 



PkEPARATIONS 



99 



Some adjectives of the ^rd Declension which do not end in 
i's have no separute form for the Nominative Singular of the 
Neuter ; in the Masculine and Feminine tlicy are dechned like 
'gens' (§34): thus— 



SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 




niasc andjem, neut. 




masc and /em. 


neut. 


1, 2 


ingens 


ingena 




ingentea 


ingentia 


3 


ingentem 


ingens 




ingentgs 


ingentia 


4 


ingentis 


ingentis 




ingentium 


ingentium 


5 


ingenti 


ingenti 




ingentibus 


ingentibu3 


C 


ingenti 


ingenti 




ingcatibua 


ingentibus 


§43- 








adversus, a, um 


adverse 


somnio 


/ dixain 


taberna, i 


ifiH [tavern] 


membrls robustls 


Abl. * 


tenebrae, i, Plur. 


darkness 


tcrra marlque 


liy land and by 


hix (luc-), 3 


light 




sea 


anxius, a, um 


aiixious 


pugnans (pugn- 


fishting 


multa, Neut. Pl. 


many thiiigs 


ant-), 3, adj.f 




of niuUus 




salvus, a, um 


saje 


ambulati6(-ion ),3 


walk 


fac (Imperative 


inake 


utihs, 3, adj. 


useful 


of 'fLicio,' 




vehiculum, 2 


carriage 


/ make, 






[vehicle] 


mater (matr-), 


ntothcr 


nox ( 


noct-), 3 


night 









* The Abl. is here translatable by ' with' ; cf. rdhiistd corpore, § 30. 

t The Adjecdves in -avs (steni -ant) arc dcclincil like iugens (stem in^ent-), 
the only difference bcin;^ in the iast vowel of the ster.) 



1 



DRILL EXERCISKS. 

[Tbe sections of ihcse drill exercises are numliered to cor'?<pond wiih thc 
sections of ihe tcxt on which theygive practice. AU the Wtrds o.curringin them 
wil! lie found in the corresponding sections of the " Prcp.trations " (pp. 59 ff.) 
The Latin scntfnces may he used for viva voce praclice, and may be varicd at 
the discretion of ihe teacher by sub.stituting othcr words that havc bcen uscd in 
the text of the story. They will also serve as models for translating the English 
sentences that foUow them into Latin. The nur/ibers in brackets in tht 
Exercises refer to seclions o/lhe " Preparations" not to sections ofthe Exercises 
thewselves ; and they servethe purpose of an English-Latin Vocabulary. Thus 
in Ex. 4 (/. loj) the reference to %3 after the worJ ^for' nieans that the 
Latin word 'juanted ■will be found in %2 ofthe Preparations {p. 6i),1 

§r, {Nominaiive and Ablative Singular.) 

Villa est bella. 

Castanea est bella. 

Ancilla in villa habitat. 

Ora maritima non procul a^ villa est. 

Non procul ab ora maritima habito. 

Sub castanea interdum canto. 



How prctty is the chestnut-tree ! 
Not far froni the chestnut-tree a nightingale sings. 
Not far from ihe country-house is the sea-shore.- 
Not far from the sea-shore is the chestnut-tree. 
In the country house I now Uve. 

^ d is used for ab bcfore a consonant. 

''Order of Words, Rule I. — Put the Adjective immediately AFTEH 
ita Noun. The English ordcr is just the opposite ; ihus \\!,ure Eni^lish say? 
' a pretty house,' Lalin says 'a house prelty'; where En.^; S s.-»ys ' Ihe sea 
shore ' or ' the maritime shore' Latin says ' the shore m. liii nc.' This rule 
applies also to Possessive Adjectives, like ' my,' 'yiur,' ' his,' 'our,' 
'their': thus where English says ' my aunt' Lntin s.ys ' aunt mine.' But 
the rule does not apply lo Adjectives used with llte verh 'to ! •,' a<; in ' the 
country-hoiise is prelty ' or ' how pretty ihe country-house is !' 



I02 DRILL EXERCISES 

§1 C07itinued. {Ge?iitive Singnlar.) 

Amita mea sub umbra castaneae interdum cantat. 

Cum amita mea sub umbra castaneae interdum canto. 

Ancilla amitae mcae in villa habitat. 

Ancilla in villa amitae meae habitat 

lanua iion procul ab ora maritima est. 



My aunt's country house is pretty. 

The door of the country-Iiouse is not far from the sea- 
shore. ^ 

Where is the nightingale? 

The nightingale sometimcs sings under the shade of tlie 
chestnut-tree. 

The nightingale does not Hve (say not lives) in the chestnul 
tree. 



After §T. Conversation. 

Q. Ubi est villa ? 

A. Villa non procul ab ora maritima esL 

Q. Ubi est castanea ? 

A. Casianea in area est. 



^Order of Words, Rui.e 2. — Put tlie Adverb BEFORE the Verb Of 
other word v^hich it qualifies. The English order is often difiTerent ; thus 
where English says ' sings well ' Latin says ' well sings.' English may say 
' sings sometimes' or 'sometimes sings,' but Latin always says ' sometimes 
oings.' This rule applies to the Adverb non, which must always come 
immediately before the word which it negatives ; and it also applies to 
Adverbial phrases formed wlth Prepositions, such as ' far from the sea-shorc ', 
' under the shade of the chestnut-tree ' ; thus for ' ihe nightingalc sings under 
ihe shade of the chestnut-tree' say ' the nightingale under iho shade of thc 
chestnut-tree sings ', 



DRILL EXERCISES IO3 

Q. Ubi ancilla cenani parat ? 

A. Ancilla sub umbra castaneae cenam interdum paraL 

Q. Ancilla in villa habitat?^ 

A. Ancilla in villa habitat. 



§ 2. [^Nominalive Plural.) 

Scaphae non procul a villa sunt. 

Feriae sunt beatae. 

Beatac sunt feriae. 

Magnae sunt procellae in ora maritima, 

Nautae procul ab ora maritima sunt 

Nautae in scapha sunt. 

Scapha non magna est. 



Where are the boats ? 

The boats are on the sand. 

Sailors Uve not far from the sand of the sea-shore. 

I sometimes sail in a boat with a sailor. 

Chains are in the boat. 

Anchors and chains are on the sea-shore. 



§2 contimied. {Geniiive P/nral.) 
Scaphae nautarum intcrdum magnae sunt. 
Ancorae scapharum magnarum magnae sunt. 
Ancorae scapharum non magnarum non magnae sunt. 



' Questions inay be asked in conversaiional Latin, as in English, simply by 
chanf^inL; ihe tone of the voice, and withoul any intermgative ixiriicle ; e.g. 
• vis pugnare?' yau waiit to figlit? (Plautus, Rudens lOll). This is very 
common in Plautus and Terence. But it is casy to introduce ihe particle 
'-ne' to the pupil from the first, if the teacher prefers ; e.g. Habitatne 
ancilla in villa? 



104 l^RILL EXERCISES 

The boats of the sailors are not far from the door of thc counlry 
house. 

The anchors of the boats are on the sand. 

The anchors and ihe chains of the anchors are on the sand. 

The inhabitants of country-houses are not sailors. 

The courage of the inhabitants of the sea-shore is great. 



§ 3. {Ablative Plural) 

Scaphae in undis sunt. 

Undae sub scaphis sunt 

In scaphis sunt nautae. 

Procella est: undae non caeruleae sunt. 

Nautae in undis non caeruleis navigant. 

Nautae in casis albis habitant. 



Sailors often sail in boats, 
I often sail with the sailors. 

Not far from the windows of the cottages are the waves of the 
sea-sliore. 

My aunt is often^ in ihe cottages of the farmers. 
There-is^ a wood not far from the cottages of the farmers. 



§ 3 continued. (^Accusative Singular and Plural afler a Pre- 
position ) 

Ante villam est arena. 

Ante casas nautarum est ora mariiima. 

Ora mariiima ])rope villam amitae nieae est. 

Prope casas agricolarum est silva. 

Post cenam in scapha non uavigo. 

Post ferias procul ab ora maritima habito. 

^ Scc Rule 2 (Order of Words). 

''There-is' and 'ihere-are' muit l)e translated simply by ihe verb: say 
not far f>om the cottagei is a wood. 



DRILL KXERCISKS I05 

Bcfore the door of the country-house is ihe sand of ihe sca-shore. 

Ncar the wood are the cottages of ihe farmers. 

During the hohdays I sometimes sail in boats. 

After ihe hoUdays I do not stay^ in the counlry-house of my aunt. 

Before the hoHdays T do not sail in boats. 



§ 3 con/ifiued. {Accusative Si/^qu/ar and Pliiral depending on a 
Verb.) 
Villam ex ora niaritima specto. 
Fenestras villae ex ora maritima specto. 
In arena scapham et ancoras et catenas specto. 
In silva plantas et lierbas specto. 
Plantas et herbas amo : bacas amo. 
Nautae casas albas amant. 
Casae albae nautas delectant. 



I love the sand.^ 

I love the sand of the sea-shore. 

I love boats and anchors and chains 

Waves dehght sailors. 

Plants dehght my aunt. 

My aunt loves sailors and farmers. 

From the windows of thc cottages the sailors see llie wuvcs. 

Boats dehght sailors : sailors love boats. 

Before the hohdays I do not see boats and the sea-shore. 



^ • I (/<? not stay^ is an English way of saying ' I stay not' ; in Latin there 
will be only one word for ' I do stay,' and the word for ' not ' must come before 
it. (For ' slay ' say live.) Similarly in ihe next sentcnce ' I do not sail.' 

-Order op Words, Rulr 3. — Put the Accnsative before tho Verb on 
wbich it de^penfls 



105 DRILL EXERCISES 

Comphte thc following sentences by inseriing a l^^erb, 

Oram maritimam . 

Ora maritima nos . 

Scaphas albas . 

Scaphae interdum caeruleae . 

Ora maritima bella. 



Compkte the fflilowing sentences by inserting a Freposilion in the 
first place and a Verb in the second. 

arena scaphae. 

oram maritimam nautas 

Agricolae silvam . 

nautis interdum ■ . 



agricolis interdum 



After^T^. Conversation. {f)\!C\A. = what^ 

Q. Quid ex fenestra spectas ? 

A. Ex fenestra undas et oram maritimam specto. 

Q. Oram maritimam amas ? 

A. Oram mariiimam amo. Undae me delcctant, 

Q. Silvam non amas ? 

A. Silvam amo. Silva me delectat. 

Q. In silva interdum ambulas ? 

A. In silva saepe ambulo. 

Q. Ubi est silva? 

A. Silva non procul a villa est. 

Q. Quid est in silva ? 

A. In silva est copia plantarum et herbarum 

Q. Bacas non amas ? 

A. Quantopere me bacae delectant 1 



DRILL EXERCISES IO7 

§ 4. ( Vocative Singiilar ani Pliiral.) 

Inter ferias te, ora maritima, et vos, undae caeruleae, saepe 
spccto. 

Vos, undae caeruleae, Britannia amat. 

Te, regina mea, amo ; te, patria mea, amo. 

Vos, incolae Africae Meridianae, regina insularum Eriiannic- 
arum amat. 



I love thee, [0] Queen Victoria, 

Victoria is queen not only of ihe British islands, but also of 
Canada, of Australia, of Soulh Africa, 

I love thee, [0] South Africa; for (§2) South Africa is my 
native-land. 

I love yoii, [0] inhabitants of Britain ; for Souih Africa is a 
British colony. 

Great is the glory of the British colonies. 



§5. {Daiive Sifigular.) 

Silva Lydiae laetitiam dat. 

Columbae Lydiae laetitiam dant. 

Lingua Francogallica Lydiae laetitiam non dat. 

Tu, Lydia, inter ferias magistrae tuae operam non dis. 

Ego inter ferias linguae Latinae operam non do. 



India gives delight to the Quecn ^ of the British isles. 

But India is not a British colony. 

The British colonies also give delight to the British Qucen. 

Canada gives dehght to Britain. 

For Canada is a great British colony. 

'Order ok Words, Rule 4. — Pnt the Dative before the Accusative. 
(Nole ihat ihe gift stands in the Accusative, and the person to whom the gift i» 
itiade in the Datlve. ) 



loS 



DRILL EXERCISES 



§ 5 continued. {Dative Flia-al.) 

Undae caeruleae nautis laetitiam dant. 

Procellae nautis laetitiani non dant. 

Plantae et herbae agricolis laetitiam dant. 

Agricolae scaphis operam non dant. 

Inter ferias Hnguis antiquis operam non saepe do. 



The Queen of Britain gives attention to the British colonies. 
The British colonies give delight to the inhabitants of the 
British isles. 
Sailors give attention to boats and anchors and chains. 
My aunt gives atteniion to the cottages of the farmers and sailors. 
Lydia gives attention to doves. 



A/fer § 5. {Practice in translation of English Frepositions.) 
Make Latin sentences containing iranslations of the following 

phrases, and then say which of these English Preposiiions are not 

translated by Prepositions in Latin. 



in a country-house. 

out-of a country-house. 

not far from a country-house. 

to a country-house 

{ivith a Verb of ^ going.') 
of a country-house. 
wilh my aunt. 

to my aunt 

{with a Verb of ' giving.') 

under a boat. 

before supper. 

aftcr supper. 



in country-houses. 
out-of country-houses. 
not far from counlry-houses 
to country-houses 

i(ivith a Verb of ^ going.') 
of country-houses. 
with my aunts. 
to my aunts 

[with a Verb of^ givin^.') 
under boats. 
during the hohdays. 



DRILL EXERCISES 



io9 



After § 5. Translate and learn the foUowing iables containirig 
fornis of Pronouns hitherto found. 







SISG UL A R. PL URA L. 


IST rEKSON. NOMINAIIVE CaSK. 


ego 


nos 




ACCUSATIVE CaSK. 


me 


nos 


2ND PeRSON. ] 


S^OMINATIVE CaSE. 


tu 


VOS 


ACCUSATIVE CaSE. 


te 


VOS 


NOMINATIVE 


Case with Veres. 








SINGULAR. 




PLURAL. 


iST Person. 


ego in villa habito. 


nos in 


villa habitamus 


2ND PeRSON. 


tu in villa habitas. 


vos in 


villa habitatis. 


3RD Person. 


amita niea in villa 


amitae 


meae in villa 




habitat. 


habitant. 



Accusative Case with Vekus. 



iST Person. 

2ND PeRSON. 

3RD Person. 



SINGULAR. 

amita mea me amat. 
amita mea te amat. 
amita mea villam amat. 



PLURAL. 

amita mea nos amat. 
amita mea vos amat. 
amita mea casas amat. 



After § 5. Conversation. 

(^Recapitulation of ist Declension and Prescnt Tcttse of ' sum ' 
and ist Coftjugation.) Q}x\% = tvho. 

Q. Quis in villa nunc habitat ? 

A. Lydia, consobrina mea, in villa tmnc habitat. 

Q. Tu quoque apud amitam tuam nunc liabitas? 

A. Ego quoque apud amitam meam nunc habito. 

Q. Quid curat Lydia ? 

A. Lydia columbas curat. 

Q. Linguae FrancogaUicae operam dai ? 

A. Linguae FrancogaHicae operam non dat : nam feriae nunc 
sunt. 

Q. Tu hnguae Latinae inter ferias operam das ? 

A. Linguae Latinae intcr ferias operam noii do. 



IIO DRILL EXERCISES 

Q. Ubi es inter ferias ? 

A. Apud amitam meam inter ferias sum. 

Q. Quid te inter ferias delectat ? 

A. Arena, ora maritima, scaphae me inter ferias delectant 

Q. In scaphis interdum navigas ? 

^. In scaphis saepe navigo. 

Q. Procellas non formidas ? 

A. Cum nauta navigo. 

Q. Tu et I^ydia in silva interdum ambulalis? 

A. In silva interdum ambulamus. 



After § 5. [Present Indicative of ' suin.') ^ 

I am an inhabitant of Britain. 

Thou, [oj Canada, art a Brilish colony. 

Canada is an ancient {aniiqud) colony of Biitain. 

We are inhabitants of the British isles. 

You, [0] British colonies, are far from the Briti.-^h isles. 

There-are British colonies in Australia. 



After §5. {Present Indicative of the ist Conjugation.) 

I now live in my aunt's country house not far from ihe sea 
shore. 

You, Lydia, now live with my aunt. 

Your schoohnistress lives far from the sea-shore. 

During the hoUdays we often sail in boats : aiid wc do not give 
attention to the languages of Rome and Greece. 

You, [0] blue waves, now dehght us. 

Dnring the holidays the languages of Rome and Grcece do not 
delight us. 

iAgreement of the Verb witii__the Subject.— The Verb must be 
cf the same Person and Number as ita £u'oject (th.it is, llie person or 
thing that ' does ' or ' is '). 



I 



DRILL EXERCISES I I I 



§6. {2ni Dedension in -us, Singular Number.\ 

Hortus belliis est. 

Tu, horte, non niagnus es. 

riortum bellum inter ferias saepe visito. 

Violae horti belli caeruleae sunt. 

Putruus meus horto bello aquam dat. 

In horto bello sunt rosae. 



My^ uncle lives in a country-house near thc sea-shore. 1 love 
my uncle. I often visit my uncle's garden. I sometimes water 
the roses and violets of the garden. I often walk in the garden 
with Lydia. Sometimes I walk round the wall of the garden with 
my uncle. There is a stream not far from the garden. In the 
stream is an abundance of water. The garden gives delight to 
niy uncle. 



§ 7. {Second Decknsion in -us, Plural Num/>er.) 

Mergi in ora maritima nidificant. 

Vos, mergi, in ora maritima nidificatis. 

Mergos in ora maritima non capto. 

Cibus mergorum in oceano est. 

Mergis inter ferias operam do. 

Corvi cum mergis non nidificant, non vohtant. 



There-is a great number of ehns in my uncle's garden 
Many^ crows live in the elms. Sea-guUs do not make-nests in 



^ Note that the adjectives in these early exerciscs (§§ iu) have ahvays the 
same endings as their Nouns. 

*The Latin Adjectives meaning 'many', 'some', 'all', ' fcw ', gencrally 
jtand be/ore iheir Nouns (not afler them, like must Adjectives ; see Kule I of 
Order, p. loi). 



I 12 DRILL EXERCISES 

elms. I like to watch (say g/adiy watcJi) thc sea-gulls, when 
I am on thc sea-shore. During the holidays I sometimes give 
food to the horses of my uncle's farm. Lydia gives food to the 
cocks and hens. My uiicle gives attention to his farm and his 
horses and cows and pigs. The crows give dehght to niy 
uncle. 



After § 7. Conversation. 

Q. Agellus patrui tui tibi et Lydiae laetitiam dat ? 

A. Agellus patrui mei nos delectat. 

Q. Quid in agello est ? 

A. In agello sunt equi et vaccae et porci et galli gallinae- 
que. 

Q. Quis equos et vaccas et porcos curat ? 

A. Ego equis interdum cibum do ; sed rustici vaccas et porcos 
curant. 

Q. Quis gallis gallinisque cibum dat ? 

A. Lydia gallis gallinisque cibum saepe dat. 

Q. Ubi habitant rustici ? 

A. Rustici in vico habitant, non procul ab agello 



§ 8. {2nd Deciension continueJ.) 

The blue waves foam and murmur round my uncle's gardcn. 
I like to watch (say giadiy tvatcii) the blue waves of the 
ocean. I like to walk to the high clifis of the sea-shore. 
The lighthouses of the French coast (say s/iore) are not far 
distant. The moon and stars often light-up the ocean. It 
deli,L;hts me to see the white cliffs and the waves. Boats 
cnrry sailors on the ocean ; sailors carry boats on the sand. 



DRTLL EXERCISES I 13 

Afler §8. Conversation. 

Q. Quid tu et Lydia in horto patrui tui spectatis? 
A. Non solum rosas et violas sed etiam corvos speclamus. 
Q. Quid ex horto spectaiis? 
A. Mergos interdum ex horto spcctamus. 
Q. Ubi sunt nidi mcrgorum ? 

A. Nidi mergorum in scopulis orae maritimae sunt ; sed non 
nuUi ex mergis in insuHs prope oram matitimam nidificant. 
Q. Ubi praedam suam captant? 
A. Praedam suam in oceano captant. 
Q. Mergi interdum super agellum volitant? 
A. Super agellum volitant; nam ibi quoque cibum suum cnptant. 
Q. Quid ex scopulis orae maritimae spcctatis ? 
A. Ex scopulis pharos orae Francogallicae spectamus. 



§9. {2nd Decknsion in -iim.) 

Oppidum antiquum in Cantio esL 

Te, oppidum antiquum, amo. 

Oppiduni antiquum inter ferias intcrdum visito. 

Fundamenla oppidi antiqui magna scd non alta sunt. 

Oppido antiquo inter ferias operam do. 

In oppido antiquo niimmi Romani suiit. 

Oppida anti^iua me delectant. 

Vos, oppida antiqua, amo. 

Oppida antiqua libenter visito. 

Aedificia oppidorum antiquorum interduni Roniana snnt. 

Oppidis antiquis libenter oi^eram do. 

In opijidis anliciuis nummi Britannici intcrdum sunt. 



Where is Kent? Kent is in South Britain. The coast (say 
ihore) of Kent is not far from the French coast. My uncle's farm 
is in Kent. Dover and Richborough are not far from my unclc's 

8 



114 DRILL EXERCISES 

farm. There-are traces of a Roman amphitheatre near Rich- 
borough. London also is an ancient town. London is not far 
distant from Kent. There-are many ancient towns on British 
soil. In Britain \ve often see the foundations of Ronian buildings. 



After §9. Conversation, 
Q. Ubi habitant patruus tuus et amita tua? 
A. In Cantio habitant, inter Dubras et Rutupias. 
Q. Quid in Cantio spectas ? 

A. [Here niay be introduced all the Noinis hitherto learned, 
Singular or Plural Number.) 



§10. {2nd Declension in -um continued.) • 

I often see the ancient castle, when I visit Dover. The castle 
is on the cliffs, near the sea-shore. The walls of the castle are not 
ancient ; but there are relics of ancient buildings in the castle. 
At-the-present-day there-is a church near the relics of the ancient 
buildings. The church also is ancient ; for it was a consecrated 
building in the second century after the birih of Christ (say a/ter 
Christ born.) 

§ 1 1. {2nd Declension in -um continued.) 

From the windows of the castle we see many vessels. There- 
are many vessels in the Enghsh Channel. Many vessels sail 
round Britain. I see the flags of British and French vessels. 
But where are the German and Belgian vessels? I do not now 
oee German and Belgian vessels in the En;^lish Channel. But 
many German and Belgian vessels sail to Britain.^ 



* Imitate itt .Africam Meridianam, So, too, in future exercises when going 
or sailing to a Coiintry is spoken ofi 



DRILL EXERCISES 115 

A/ier % II. Conversation. 

Q. Dubras et Rutupias interdum visitas P 

A. Dubras saepe visito. 

Q. Quid ibi spectas? 

A. Castellum antiquum ibi specto. 

Q. Quid in castello spectas ? 

A. In castello speculam antiquam specto. 

Q. Quid ex castello spectas ? 

A. Ex castello fretum Gallicum et clivos gramlnec-^ spccto. 

Q. Quid in freto Gallico spectas? 

A. In freto Gallico navigia specto. 

Q. Navigia libenter spectas ? 

A. NonnuUa ex navigiis in patriam mcam navigan^. 

§ 12. {2nd Dechnsion in -er.) 

Puer Marcus condiscipulus meus est. 

Tu, puer Marce, mihi praecipuus amicus es. 

Puerum Marcum saepe visito. 

Pueri Marci patria est Caledonia. 

Puero Marco feriae magnam laetitiam dant. 

Cum puero Marco saepe nato. 

Duo pueri prope Dubras habitant. 

Vos, pueri, condiscipuli mei estis. 

Pueros, condiscipulos nieos, pilae delectant. 

Patria puerorum procul a Cantio est. 

Pueris ludi in arena laetitiam dant. 

Cum pueris intenlum in scapha navigo. 



Two boys are my friends. They live in Kent, but Scotl.Tnd is 
the native-land of the boys. The boys are my schoolfellows. I 
often visit the boys during the hohdays. Sometimes I swim with 
the boys in the blue waves. How much it delights us boys to see 
the great waves ! 



Il6 DKILL EXERCISES 

§ 13. [jnd Declension i;i -er continued.) 

Diiring tlie holidays a boy does not pay attention to lessons. 
The ancient languages of Greece and Ronie do not dclight a boy 
during the holidays. There-are many aniusements of a boy when 
he is free ^ from lessons. Games of ball give great delight to a 
boy, not only during the hoHdays but also when he is not ^ free 
from lessons. 

Peter is a sailor. I Hke Peter. Peter's boat is a source (§9)^ 
not only of amusement but also of gain to Peter. 



A/ter %^^: Cotiversation. {QviOt = ho7V fnany.) 

Q. Quot tibi amici sunt? 

A. Duo milii sunt amici. 

Q. Ubi habitant amici tui ? 

A. Prope Dubras nunc habitant amici mei. 

Q. Pueros interdum visitas ? 

A. Pueros saepe visito. 

Q. Quid vos pueros inter ferias delectat ? 

A. Ludi pilarum, castella in arena aedificarc, in undis natarc, 
in scaphis navigare nos delectant. 

Q. Undas spumiferas non formidatis? 

A. Undas non formidamus. 

Q. Vos pueri interdum remigatis? 

A. Interdum remigamus, cum undae non nimis asperae sunt. 

Q. Quis rcmigat cum undae asperae sunt? 

A. Cuni undae nimis asperae sunt, Petrus remigat vel velis 
rninistrat. 

^The Adjective used with the Verb ' to be ' must be in the same Case and 
Number as the Subjccl of which it is s.iid ; thus here 'free' niust be Nominalive 
Singular, because ' hc ' is Nominative Singular. 

''See Order of Words, Rule 2. llere 'not' negatives 'free' and must 
therefore stand immcdiately before it. 

* Where a number is quolcd like this in brackets, it mcans that the word 
required can be found in a certain secMon of the Preparations. 



DRILL EXERCISES II7 

^ 14. {2nd Decktision continued: 'vir'.) 

'riiere is a nobleman^ nientioned in a play^. The nobleman's 
life is unhappy. The man has^ two sons. The son Edgar* 
is faithful. But the son Edniund* does not love the nobleman. 
The nobleman prepares to hurl himself down-from a cliff. 
The chff is near Dover. But the failhful son walks to the cliff 
with the nobleman, and saves the life of the unhappy man. 



After § 14. 

1. Write t7vo sentences about the things seen ifi Kent during the 
holidaxs. Jn the first sentence say 'During the holidays I see 

. . . .' ; in the second sentence say ' How much it delights me to 
see . . . . ' {and here put in the things that you like best to see). 

2. Repeat ihe table 0/ Pronouns giveti after § 5, and add the 
Dative Cases, Singular and Plural (mihi, tibi, nobis, vobis). 
JiJake up sentences conlaining ihese Datives. 



% 15. {2nd Declension in er continued.) 

Magister noster vir doctus est. 

Tu, magister, mihi carus es, 

Magistrum nostrum amo. 

Libri magistri nostri pulchri sunt. 

Libri magistro nostro magnam laetitiam dant. 

Cum magistro nostro saep? ambulamus. 

Magistri nostri viri docti sunl. 

Vos, magistri, pueris pigris non cari estis. 

Ma_j;istros multi pueri formidant. 

* Note thal the Adjective in this ca«e has not the same cnding a= the Noun; 
so, t,io, often in the foilowing exeicises. 

' Say itt a play iiuniiorted; see Order of \Vord>, Ruic 2. 

' Say to the mun there-are ; see Pre/>aiatii>iis, § 9, end (palruo meo est). 

* Tliese English names may be latinized as Edgarut, Edinundus. 



Il8 DRILL EXERCISES 

Libri magistrorum nostrorum docti sunt. 

Magistris nostris copia librorum est. 

Cum magistris nostris ludis saepe operam damus. 



I often see our schoolmaster during the holidays. Our school- 
masler has^ many books about (§ lo) Britain. We boys like to 
see^ the books of our schoohnaster. The schoolmaster's books 
are filled^ with Roman and Greek coins. I am a schoolfelluw of 
Mark and Alexander in a famous and ancient schook Not only 
the boys but also the masters of our school pay atteniion to games. 



§ i6. {Agreement of Adjectives.) 



villa Romana oppidum Romanura 

fagus Britamiica 



nummus Romanus 
vir doctus 
hber Latinus 
nauta Romanus 

RuLE. — Make the Adjective agree with its Noun in Gender^ 
as well as in Number and Case. 

This rule appHes not only to examples hke those above, in 
which the Adjective is called an Attribute of the Noun, but also 
to examples Hke the foUowing, in which the Adjective is uscd with 
the Verb * to be ' and is called a Predicate Adjective : 
nummus est Romanus. villa est Romana. 
vir est doctus. fagus est Britannica. 



oppidum est 
Romanum. 



* Say to our schoohnaster there-are ; see Preparations §9, end. Similarly 
in all future scntences where ihe verb ' to have ' occurs in this book. 

^ llere and in all future sentences whcre ' like to ' occurs say 'gladly 

' Use creber, and rcmember the riile for the Case and Number of Adjectives 
used wilh the vcrb ' to be ' given on g 13 (' he is free'). 

* For Rules of Gender see Prcparations § 15 (p. 75). — Note that the ending 
of ihe Adjective is not always the same as that of the Noun (sis it was in the 
cxercises on §§ i-il). 



DRILL EXERCISES 119 

A learned teacher is sometimes not dcar to hoys. Our teacher 
is learned. Boys are not learncd. My aunt is not learncd. 15ut 
we boys love our teacher. And my aunt likes to hsten when a 
learned man tells about the ancient P>ritons. There-were^ great 
forests in ancient Britain. But thcre-were not many beeches in 
the British forests. So Gaius JuUus afifirms. There were niany 
wolves and bears in the great forests of ancient Britain. 



§ 17. {Agfyement.o/ AJjectives co?itinued.) 

Were the Roman sailors lazy? Gaius Juhus does not blame 
(§ 14) tlie Roman sailors. He praises'^ the courage of his sailors. 
Roman farmers were active, as a Roman poet affirms. There were 
niany Roman sailors (say tfiany sailors Roman') on the vessels of 
Gaius^ Julius. Roman vessels were-able to sail to Britain and 
round the British coast. The rains of Britain were hideous then/ 
as they are now.* The small pearls of the British ocean were 
mostly (§ 13) dark or blue. 



§ 18. {Past Jm-perfect Indicative 0/^ sum' and the ist Conjuga- 
tion.) 

Proximo anno in Cantio eram. 
Proximo anno in Cantio eras. 
Proxiino anno in Cantio erat. 
Proximo anno in Cantio eramus. 
Proximo anno in Cantio eratis. 
Proximo anno in Cantio erant. 



* The only forms of ihe ['ai^t Iiii|jerrect needcil fur this and the foUowing 
exercise ar« those which luwe actually occurred in ihe lext of the slory. 

" Use the verb laudu, ' I piaise ' {Preparatiotis § 13). 
" (jaius forms Gen. Gai, Dat. Gai5. 

* Remember that ' then ' and ' now ' are Adverbs. 



120 DklLL EXERCISES 

Multa aedificia antiqua spectabam. 
Multa aedilicia antiqua speciabas. 
Multa aedificia antiqua spectabat. 
Multa aedificia antiqua spectabamus. 
Multa aedificia antiqua spectabatis. 
Multa aedificia aniiqua spectabant. 



Tlie large vessels of British sailors are mostly (§ 13) black ; but 
the little boats are sometimes white, sometimes blue, sometimes 
yellow. Last year, while (§ 16) I was in Kent, I used-to-see many 
British sailors. They were all sun-burnt. Some^ of the sailors 
used-to-taitoo (say colour) their Umbs. The clothes of British 
and French sailors are blue. British sailors mosily have sturdy 
hmbs and a great stature. Our sailors sail round the coasts of all 
lands, as the Roman sailors used-to-sail round the coasts of the 
Mediterranean.^ A British sailor does not fear storms. 



§ 19. {^Adjedives and Past Imperfect Indicative continued^ 
Werc all the inhabitants of ancient Britain Celts? I think not.^ 
Some of the ancient inhabitants of our island were not barbarous. 
The inhabitants of Kent were mo>.tly farmers, as they are now.* 
Many of the inhabitants of Kent were Belgians (§ 15). Were not 
the Bclgians a German tribe (§ 18) ? Does not Gaius Juhus so 
affirm in his book about the Gallic war ? The German tribes were 
moderately civiUzed, but the ancient Cclts of Britain were not 
civilized. 



'The word for 'some' tnust stand in the Noininalive Case and be Masculine 
Plural, because ' some of the sailors ' means ' some iailors of l)ie sailors' ; see 
the example in § 1 1 of the siory. 

* Say ' ihe .Mediterraneaa ocean.' ' .Mediierranean ' is an A Ijective, mean- 
ing ' Mid-land,' and is in Latin Mtditifraneus (a,ui/i). 

* A very conimon way of saying ' I ihink not,' ' I hope not," and so forlh in 
Latin is ' I do not think,' ' I do not hope,' etc 

* Remember that ' now ' is an Adverb. 



DRILL EXERCISES 121 

§ 20. [So/ne uses of the Ablative without a Preposition : sce 
sunnnary of these uses at the eiid of frefarations § 20.) ' 

{A.) In ihe second century before ihe birth of Christ^ Britain 
was free. The boys and girls (§ 15) of the uncivilized Britons 
were free from lessons. The savage (§ 18) Britons togetlier with 
their sons used-to-kill stags and wild-boars in the woods with 
S])ears and arrows. They used-to-catch (§ 7) wild-beasts with 
hunting dogs (§ 19) for the sake of food. 

{B.) The civiHzed Britons used-to-adorn^ their Unibs with 
golden chains and with precious-stones (§ 19). By nieans of the 
vcssels of the Veneti they used-to-export corn to Gaul. The 
Druids were the teachers of the childrcn of the civilized Britons. 
The Romans used not to fight with chariots. They used-to-fight 
wilh barbarous tribes for the sake of victory and gain (§ 9). They 
used often to kiU their ca[)tives ; but sometimes they used to seU 
the captives at a great price (§ 9). 



^NoTEON THE AuLATiVE wiTHOUT A Prkposition. The foUowing 
English Picposilions are to be Iranslatecl by the Ablative without a Preposition 
in certain cases. 

* Froni,' when it comes after 'free' (liber, §12) and 'I am free ' {vaco, §6). 

'In' or 'At,' when it comes befure a Noun denoling timj, as 'in ihe second 
ceniury,' secundo saeculo (§10), 'at what o'clock?' quold hora'i (%2.\). Also 
bcfore a Koun oenoling price or value, as 'at a great price,' tita^no pretio (§9). 

' With,' when it mcans ' by means of,' or fornis a phrase answering ihe 
question 'how?': as 'they used to fight with spears and arrows,' hastis et 
sagiltis pugnabant (§18), ' they used to fight with great courage,' inagna 
audacii pugnabant ; ' hideous with ra.\x\%,' fluviis foedum (§17); ' fiUed with 
victims,' victitnis plena (§20) ; ' crowded with children,' liberis creber (§ 15). 

' By nicans of ' is generaliy to be translated by thc Ablative alonc. 

[A fuller account of how to translate Englibh Prepo^itions is given at the 
cnd of this book.] 

"^ Here and in future exeiciscs where Ihe phrase ' before the biuh of Chrisi' 
occurs, say before Christ born. 

' Use the verb orno, I adorn, I ornamcnt. 



122 DRILL EXERCISES 

§2 1. [Sonie fo>-/iis of tlie Future Indicative.Y 

How I shall like - to walk to the place where the battle was i 
Where will the place be? The place will be on the coast of Kent, 
between Do\Jer and Richborough. The road will be long, but it 
will be very-pleasing to us to see the place. You, Mark and 
Alexander, will walk with me and with niy uncle to the place. 



§2 2. {Future Indicative atid Imperative of ^ suin' and jst 
Conjtigation.) 

Locum cras spectabo, si caehu^ serenum crit. 
Tu, Marce, locum spectabis, si caehmi sereiuun erit. 
Alexander locum spectabit, si caelum serenum erit. 
Universi locum spectabimus, si caelum serenum erit. 
Vos, amita mea et Lydia, locum non spectabitis. 
Amita mea et Lydia locum non spectabunt. 

Specta, Marce ! 
Spectate, pueri ! 



If the sky is^ clear, we shall-be-able to see the place where the 
Roman vessels were. My uncle will show us* the place. At what 
oclock shall we arrive? You, Mark and Alexander, will dine with 
us when it is^ evening. We shall carry our lunch wiih us. The 
cakes and apples will give us * great dehght. "Show me * the 
tombs," says Alcxander. Alexander is a httle boy. " Not loo 

^The only forms needed for this exercke are those whioh have aciually 
occurred in §21 of the slory. 

-See note 2 on p. Ii8. 

^S&y s/ia/i ie. The Future Tense often means ' sliall' as well as ' will' 
in ihc 2nd and 3rd Persons, especially in suburdinale clauses. Sonictimcs 
it means ' will ' in the ist Person. 

■•Whnl Preposilion miglit Le used before the Pronoun in EngUsh ? Think 
of the meaning. This Preposilion after a vcrb of ' showing ' is translated in 
the samc way as after a verb of ' givins;.' 



DRILL EXERCISES 123 

fast ! (say hurry' slo7ii/y)" says my uncle. " Give attention, boys," 
says niy aunl, "'we shall dine at the eleventh hour. I shall praise 
(§ 13) yo*^) if you arrive^ before the eleventh hour. You will not 
arrive after the eleventh hour, as I hope." " I hope not,""^ says 
my uncle. 

§ 23. [Future Indicative and Tmperative contifiued.) 
\Ve shall start (say give ourselves to the road) at the fifth hour. 
We shall not walk quickly. For Alexander will be tired if we 
walk 3 too (§ 1 2) quickly. What o'clock will it be when we 
aiii\c?* Will you be tired, Alexander, if we ariive* at thc tenth 
hour? "I shall not be tired " says Alexander. " You will not 
wu!k too quickly, as I hope," says my aunt, " for Alexander is a 
litlle boy." "Not too fiist ! (say hurry slowly)" says Lydia; 
"Alexander will be hungry before the tenih hour. Cairy an 
apple with you, Alexander ! " "I shall not be hungry," says 
Alexander. "Give me the cakes," says my uncle. "Good-bye" 
says my aunt ; "arrive in-good-time (say (7//^r/««<f/>')." 



§ 24. {Ferfect Indicative of ' sum ' and ist Conjugation.) 
Fractice in all persons of the Singular and Flural the sentence: 
Locum spectavi quo Gaius luHus navigia sua applicavit. 

The sky was clear when we walked to the place where Gaius 
JuUus fought with the Britons. In the year 55 B.C.* he built 
vessels in Gaul and sailed from the GalHc coast to the coast of 
Kent. He brought his vessels to land between Dover and Rich- 

^ Say skall arrive. 

* See note 3 on p. 120, 

- Use the Future Tense, as in Ex. §22, p. 122. 

* Say in the fifty-fifth year before Chrisl born ; and siniilarly in all future 
senlences when the phrase ' B.C or ' A.D.' (Anno Domini) occurs, say before 
Christ born or nfter Christ bot n. 



]J4 DKILL EXERCISES 

borough, as leamed men have gcnerally [mostly, § 13) affirmed. The 
Britons were prepared (§21), aiid ihey hasteiied to the place. My 
uncle has often seen the place, but we boys have never been there. 

§ 25. {Pliiperfect Indicative 0/ ' stim ' and ist Conjugation). 
Practice in all persons of the Singular and Plural the sentence : 
Ad locum adventaveram quo Gaius luhus navigia sua appUcavit. 



When Gaius Julius anchored ^ his vessels near the British 
coast, the Britons had already gathered themselves together on ihe 
cUffs. " We Britons wiU never be slaves (§19)" they say (§ 21). 
They had hastened along the sea-shore and had prepared them- 
selves for battle (§24). iloman forces had never before sailed to 
our island. But GaUic vessels had often sailed to Britain for the 
sake of commerce. Gaius JuUus had never before been in Britain. 
But he had waged-war (§ 24) against the inhabitants of the neigh- 
bouring coast. The Gauls (§ 19) had told Gaius JuUus^ many- 
things about Britain. 

§ 26. {Future Present Indicative of ' sum ' and ist Conjugation.) 
Practice in all persons (f the Singular and Plural the sentence : 
Cum aUerum pomum gustavero, in viam me dabo. 

" When^ shaU we-have arrived home*? " says Alexander. " My 
aunt wiU not praise (§13) us" say I (§21) " if we arrive* late 
(§23)." "We shaU have arrived before the eleventh hour," says 

^ Where the phrase ' to anchor ' oecurs, say ' to fasten to anchors,' as in the 
story. 

'^What Preposition might be put in before ' Gaius Juhus' in English ? 
Compare Ex. 22, note 4 (p. 122). 

* What is the word for ' when ' in a question ? 

* Use ihe word ihat properly means ' homewards' : for the Romans always 
spoke of arriving ' lo a place ' (not ' at a place.') 

» Use the Futurp Prrfert Ten-se (shall have ). 



DRILL EXERCISES 125 

my uncle, "unless (§25) ihere-is^ rain (§17). If the sky is* clear, 
we shall not arrive late, as I hope." "IJnless you, Alexander, 
walk^ quickly," says Mark, " there will be deiay." " When 
shall we visit Richborough ? " say I. " If you visit ^ me next year 
(j>roximo anno)" says my uncle " I will walk with you to Rich- 
borough,^ and I will show vou the ruins of the castle belonging- 
to-Richborough (§21)." 



After § 26. {On Adjectives in -atus, a, uin). 

A. Translate and compare the following exampks of Adkctives in 
-atus, -a, -um, ivJiich have occurred in ihe story. 
Aedificium consecratum (§10). 
Nonnulla navigia Castella r\ominata sunt (§ i i)' 
Locus in fabula commemoratus est (§ 14^ 
Urnae pulchre ornatae (§20). 
Quota hora parati eritis? (§21). 
Non fatigatus sum (§23). 
Copiae armatae (§ 24). 
Quando satiatus eris ? (§ 26). 

All these Adjectives are formed from Verbs, like tke Eng/ish 
Adjectivcs in -ed or -n formed from Verbs. Adjectives formed from 
Verbs are generally called ^ Participles,' and they may be used, like 
other Adjectives, either to qualify Nouns or with tJie Verb ^ to be' 
(see examples above). IVhen they are used tvith tJie Verb ^ to be' tJiey 
form certain tenses of tJu ^ Passive Voice,' as in EnglisJi. 



' Use the Future Perfect Tcnse (shalt have ). 

^ Imitate the way of saying ' to Dover ' given in § 24 of the story, and see 
also ihe rule given in Prepnralions §22. The case used to express 'lo' and 
'from' with the name of a Town is ihe same as if ihe Preposilions wt and ah 
were uscd. 



126 DRILL EXEKCISES 

B. Translate i?ito Latin. 

I am not satisfied. 

Are you fatigued, Alexander ? 

The um is beautifully adorned. 

I have seen an urn beautifully adorned. 

The Britons were armed with spears and arrows. 

The Brilnns were prepared for (cf. § 24) battle. 

We wer»» prepared for lunch. 

The building was already consecrated in the second century, 

The Romap vessels were already fastened to anchors (§ 24) 

The Britons were gathered-together on the sea shore (§ 25) 



After § 26. {On Adjectives in -andus^ a, um, and Nouns iu 
-a7idum)} 

Translate in the ivay indicated in the Preparations (§§25, 24, 23) 
the folloiving sentences containing Adjectives in -andus, a, um : — 

Audacia aquihferi erat laudanda [Jaud-able or praise-worthy, 

§25). 

Audacia laudanda aquiliferi Romanos servavit. 

Magister noster est amandus {ami-able or lov-able or worthy-to-he- 
lored). 

Amita mea est amanda. 

Amita mea amanda in Cantio habitat. 

Scopuli Cantii sunt spectandi {jvorthy-tobe-secn or simply to-be- 
seen). 

Scopulos spectandos Cantii saepe visitavi. 

Navigia ad scopulos non sunt appliranda {to-be-brought-to- 
land). 



* Tlie iises of the Adjoctivcs in -andus, a, uni, and Noiins in -anduin wilJ 
be more fuUy explaincd hcie.ifter (al the end of ihe Exercises). 



DRILL EXERCISES 12/ 

Locus non idoneus est ad navigia applicanda {for vcssels io-be- 
broi4ght-to-land, § 34).^ 

Locus idoneus erat ad copias explicandas {for forces to-be- 
deployed, §25). 



Translate ihe following sentences containing Noiins in -andiem: — 

Paratus sum ad ambulandum {for walking, §23). 

Parati sumus ad remigandum {cf. remigo, I row). 

Cupidi {desirous) sumus remigandi (Gen. Case of 'remigandum.') 

Cupidi eramus visitandi locum ubi proelium erat. 

Cupidus sum ambulandi ad locum. 

Ad locum ambulandi cupidus sum. 



§ 27. {Sfd Declension. — Masculines and Feminines thnt form t/ie 
Nominative Singular without adding -s). 

{A). C. Julius Caesar was a famous {c/arus, § 15) general of the 
Romnns in the first century B.C. Great was the glory (§4) of C. 
Julius Caesar. The Gauls feared (§ 2 ; say used-io-fear) Caesar. 
For within (§22) three years he had defeated (§24) the Helvetii^ 
in South Gaul and the Veneli on the Gallic coast and the tribes 
of Belgic Gaul. Tliere-were niany Caesars before and after C. 
Julius Caesar. The Romans used-to-name^ the Caesars * Generals.' 
The forces of the Caesars were great. My uncle has told me 
many-things about the Caesars. 



'Compare in English such sentences as ' It is time for Ihc dinner to 1)0 got 
ready,' ' I am eagcr for the dinner to be got ready,' ' Ring the bell (or the 
dinner to be cleared away,' etc. 

^ Helvetii, the plural of Helvetius, is a noun of the 2nd Declension. The 
llelvelii lived in Helvetia (Swilzerland). 

'Use itouii>io 'I name,' from which comes the Adjective nominaius, a, um 
'namcd' (§11). 



1^6 DRILL EXERCISES 

(B). Wh)- did Caesar wage-war against Britain? The cause (§9) 
of the expedilion against Britain is known (§16). During the 
war with the Veneti some of the tribes ^ of Britain had suppHed 
auxih'aries to^ the Veneli. For the Veneti had been friends of tiie 
tribes of South Britain during niany years. There had also been 
war between the tribes of Soulh Britain. And the Trinobantes 
were friends of the Romans. Accordingly (§ 19) Caesar prepared 
to supply aid to the Trinobantes against the Cassi. 



§ 28. (Same Nouns co/ttinued.) 

Caesar's first expedition was not great ; but in the second 
expedition of the next year a great multitude of vessels and five 
legions sailed with Caesar to Britain. How-many^ mcn were-there 
in a Roman legion ? How-many men were-there in five Roman 
legions ? The number was different (§19) in different centuries. 
Among* Caesar's forces were also many Galhc auxiharies. For 
the Belgae and other Galhc tribes had supphed forces to Caesar. 
Many Caesars were warUke. In the first century A. D. one (§22) 
of the Caesars named Claudius was the second conqueror {viitor) 
of Britain. I do not Jove the Caesars ; but C. Juhus Caesar was 
a great man and a great gcneral. 



§ 29. {jfcl Dedension. — Masculines and Feminines tliat fonn 
the Noviinative Singiilar by adding s.) 

A. The; e had been peace between the Romans and the Britons 
after the first expedition of Caesar. It was not necessary for 
Caesar (§24) to wage-war a seco-id-time against the free tdbes of 

'Translate 'tribe' hy itatio (instead of />o/utus) in ihis and all following 
exercises. 

^The verb ' to supply ' is a verb of 'givinij.' How, ihen, is to the Veixmi 
to be translated ? 

*' How-many' is (^m^/ "(indeclinable ; see Latin Driil § 13). 

* Say /// the nuiuber o/. 



DRILL EXERCISES I29 

Britain. But he was desirous of glory and booty. Accordingly 
in the year 54 B.C. he transporled five legions of Roman soldicrs 
and a great multitude of Gallic horse-soldiers to our island. The 
soldiers of the Roman legions were foot-soldiers.^ Caesar did not 
feai the lcmpests^ of the English channel; he did not fear tlie 
arrows and cbariots of the British tiibcs. From (ex) the pluck 
of his soldiers and sailors he expected (§ 26) victory. 



§ 30. (jrd Declension. — Neuiers in -nien, -us or -ur.y 
Aniong Caesar's legions was the tenth (§22) legion. The name 
of the tenth legion was * Alauda.'* The nameof the tenth legion 
was famous, and dear to the soldiers. What^ was the name of the 

^The word for ' foot-soldier ' is pedes (%\.em pedit-), declined like miles and 
eques. [J>ed-it- means properly 'foot-goer,' as equ-it- means * horse-goer.'] 

'Use tempestas, which also means ' weather' {Preparations §29). 

'These Neuters, like the Masculines and Feminines of §§ 27 anJ 2S, form 
the Nominative Singular wiihout adding an s. The s of words like tei/ipus 
(wilh an r before the ending of ihe Gcn. Sing.) is not an addition to the stem 
but part of it : bctween two vowels, however, the s changcs to r. 

The Rule of Gender in the ^rd Decl. is therefore : — 

1. Nouns denoting PERSONS are Masculine if they denote MALE 

PERSONS, Feminine if they denote FEMALE PERSONS. (This 
rule is the same for all declensions). 

2. Nouns not denoting persons and forming the Nominative Singular 

by adding an s are mostly Feminino. 
8. Not^ns not denoting persons and forming the Nominative Singular 
without adding an s are mostly — 

Feminine if the Nom. Sing. ends in 10, DO or GO ; 
Neuter if the Nom. Sing. ends in MEN, US, UR, or E; 
Masculine in other cases (for in^tance wben the 
Nom. Sing. ends in OR). 

*A Noun of the ist Declension, meaning ' the Lark.' 

• Use quid [stt Drill Ex. § 3, p. 106). In asking ' what is the name?' the 
Romans regularly used the Pronoun quid (not the adjectival form of it). 



130 DRILL EXERCISES 

river where there was a great contest of the Britons against the 
Romans? There-are many rivers in South Britain. Caesar does 
not raention^ the name of the river. A Roman had three^ names. 
The first names of Caesar were Gaius and Juhus. The chief (§12) 
name of a Roman was the second name. 



§ 3 1. {Same Nouns coniinued.) 

{A.) There were many contests of the Britons with the Romans. 
In some of the contests the Britons carried off the victory. But 
they were not able to stand (§ 11) against the weight and strength 
of the Roman legions. The bodies of tne Britons were big and 
strong, and the Roraans were mcn of small i;odies.^ But Caesar's 
legions were skilled (§15) in* war. Accordirigly they mostly (§13) 
carried off the victory without many wounds. 

{B.) Before the time of C. Juhus Caesfir Roman vessels had 
never (§25) sailed to our island, unless (§25) for the sake of 
commerce (§19). After the time of C. JuHus Caesar another (§24) 
Caesar, by name Claudius, got-logether (§ 28) an expedition against 
Britain. In the times' of Nero^ Agricola defeated (§ 24) ihe 
Britons and Caledonians. C. Julius Caesar was the first but not 
the chief (§ 12) conqueror of the Britons. 



' Use commemoro, ' I mention,' from which comes the Adjective comviemor- 
atns, a, um 'mentioned' (§ 14). 

^The Neuter of ircs (§ 27) is /r/a. 

'For 'men' use homo ; and for 'of small bodies' say ' wilh small bodies,' 
as in the last line of § 30 of the story. 

^What Case does the Adjective meaning 'skilled' take in Latin? See 
rnparations § 15 (p. 73). 

*No Preposition in Latin; for 'in the times' denotes time when; cf. p. 69. 
' A^ero (stem Neron-) was one of the early Caesars or Emperors of Rome, 
belonging to the Julian family. 



DRILL EXERCISES I3I 

§32- {3^^ Declension. — Feminines and Masadines in -is, likt 
* navis '). 

{A^ Caesar's fleet was large. For there-were not only ships of- 
burden but also ships of-war in the fleet. How-many^ ships sailed 
with Caesar on the second expedilion ? The whole (§ 16) number 
of the ships was eight-hundred. Six-hundred of (use ex) the ships 
were ships of-burden. The Romans sometimes used-to-name- ships 
of-burden ' vessels.' ' Vessel ' is a noun (say na^ne) of the second 
declension (use declinatio), but ' ship ' is a noun of the third (§ 23) 
declension. 

{B.) When the enemy^ saw Caesar's great fleet, they feared 
(§ 2). But the size of Caesar's ships was small. In the ships of- 
burden were the soldiers and the horses-and the arms. Why did 
Caesar sail with ships of-war against the British enemy?^ The 
Britons had built no ships. But Caesar perhaps (§ 25) did-not- 
know (§31) this.'* He had prepared his second expedition in^ the 
winter of the year 55 B.C. He sailed in^ the sumrner (§29) of the 
next (§28) year. In ancient times Rome ruled^ the waves. 



§ 33. {Same Nouns continued.) 

In a Roman ship of-burdcn not more'^ than two-hundred (§32) 
men were-able to sail. A ship of-burden was not so large as a 
ship of^var. How-many men were-able to sail in Caesar's fleet ? 

1 See Ex. §28, Note 3 (p. 128), and Latin Drill, § 13. 
*See Ex. §27 A, Note 3 (p. 127). 

* Use the Piural (enemies). 

*Use hoc ; see Preparations § 15 (p. 73^. 

*No Preposition in Latin ; for *in the winter' and 'in the summer' denote 
time -u<hen, like ' in the second century ' {Prep. § 10), ' last year ' (§ 16), etc. 

• Say was rnistress 0/. 

'The Singular Number of the word meaning ' morc ' {P>ep. §33)isgood 
Latin here ; but the Verb ' were-able ' must be Plural, as in the English. 



132 DRILL EXERCISES 

On a Roinan ship of-war there-were somelimes high turrets, as 
(§ i8) on ships of-the-present-day (§i8). From the high turrets 
the soldiers used to drive-off (§ 25) the enemy with spears (§18). 
An ancient ship of-war had sails and oars. An ancient ship of-war 
was not armed with iron plates. An ancient ship of-war was not 
so large as a ship of-war of-the-present-day. 



§34. {jfd Dechnsion. — Feminines and Afasciilines whose siems 
end ifi iwo consonanis.) 

(A.) Cassivellaunus was king of a small part of South Britain 
What^ was the name of the race? In ancient times^ there-were 
many races and many kings in Britain. Many^ of the races were 
barbarous. But the races of the Southern (use meridianus, a, um) 
parts were not barbarous. Before the times of Caesar Cassi- 
vellaunus had fought against the-other (§ 19) races of South 
Britain. The name of the king of the Trinobantes was 
Imanuentius. 

(B.) The boundaries of many British races are not known (§ 16) 
to us. The names of the British kings are mostly (§13) not 
mentioned (§14) in the book of Caesar. Britain was not a part 
of the Roman empire* after the victory of Caesar. After the 
time of Claudius, the fourth (§29) Caesar, ^ Britain was under the 
command^ of the Caesars. The name of the family {u^e ^ens) of 
C. JuHus Caesar was the Julian family. The Romans used-to- 
name the Caesars " Princes " and " Generals." 

^See Ex. §30, note 5 (p. 129). 

^See Ex. §31, note 5 (p. 130). 

'What Gender? ' Maiiy of the races' means ' many rac^s of the races.' 
For ' of ' use ex. 

* Use impcnmn. 

'In what case must ' the fourth Caesar' be ? Tliink of the meaning 
(ajicr the tixi ef the fourth Caesar). 



DRILL EXERCISES 133 

^ 35- {Sa/ne Nouns iO/iiinued.) 

{A.) Sonie^ of ihe Soulhem or maritime races of Britain were 
Belgians (§ 15). But the Eelgae were of German origin, as Caesar 
tells us in the 'Gallic War.' The chapter is the fourth of the second 
book. Therefore there-were people^ of German origin in Britain 
in the first and second century B,C. The inhabitants of modem 
Britain (say of Britain of-the-preseni-day) are mostly of German 
origin. But they migrated across the German ocean into Britain 
in the fourth and the fifth century after the birth of Christ. 

{B.) Many modern cities are named from (use ex) the Belgian 
(§ 1 1) races of Kent. The names of the cities are Belgian. But 
the Belgians of Britain used not to build cities, if the testimony 
(§ 1 7) of Caesar is true. Winchester (§ 1 5) is the name of an ancient 
city of South Britain. The inhabitants of cities are not barbarous. 
Caesar tells us about Brilish ' towns.' The British ' towns ' were 
different from (§ 19) cities. 



§36. [jrd Dec/ension. — Neuters in -e, like 'mare.') 
The British sea separates (§34) Britain from Gaul. A part of 
the British sea is named the ' GaUic channel.' Some of the 
Gauls used-to-sail across the British sea to Brilain for the sake of 
commerce. London is not many miles distant from the sea. The 
Biitons did not fight against Caesar on the sea, because they had 
never (§25) built ships. British sailors now sail across many seas. 
On many seas and in many lands (§4) you see the British flag (§ 1 1). 

^What Gender? ' Some of the races' means ' some races of the races.' 
For ' of ' use ex. 

" Say men, and use Aomo {Prep. § 30). Ilomo means ' human being ' and 
includes women ; vir does not include women. The Plural oihomo is Ihe only 
word tlial can be used for ' people ' in the sense of ' persons ' ; for populus 
means ' o peopie ' in ihe sense of ' a nation ' or ' a tribe,' and the Plural 
populi means ' nations ' or ' tribes.' 



134 DRILL EXERCISES 

§37. {Recapitulation of Nouns of jrd Dedension.) 
The British soldiers used-to-fight from {out-of) chariots. Caesar 
had not only foot-soldiers but also horse-soldiers (§29). But the 
mobility of the Roman soldiers was not great. Accordingly the 
enemy often used-to-thro\v-into-confusion the ranks of the Romans. 
In modern times ^ horse-soldiers sometimes carry (§6) the arms 
(§30) of foot-soldiers. Thus they are able to leap- down-from 
(§14) their horses and to fight on-foot. The Boers ^ of South 
Africa have horse-soldiers of-this-kind. 



§38. {Recapitulation of Nouns ofjrd JDeclension continued.) 

The boundaries (§34) of the Cassi were across (§35) the rivcr 
Thames. The Brilish leader (§29) used not to fight against the 
Romans in proper (§37) battles. He used to dash suddenly out- 
of the woods and attack the Roman legions. Then he used to 
recall (§31) his horse-soldiers and his chariots. The British leader 
had many thousands (§ 36) of charioteers. Accordingly he some- 
times used-to-carry-ofif the victory. There-were ten cohorts in a 
Roman legion, and about (§36) five-hundred (§36) men in a 
cohort. Accordingly there-were about five (§26) thousand men 
Issiy five thousands of men) in a legion. 



§ 39. {Recapitulation of Nouns of jrd Decletision continued.) 

Caesar hastened to the banks of the river Thames. * Where 

was the 'town' of Cassivellaunus? Caesar does not name the 

town. The town was not a city. It was not strengthened (§ 30) 

with walls. It was not London. But it was not far from London. 

'See Ex. §31, Note 5 (p. 130). 

" Say give themselves, as in § 25 of the story. 

»5aA7r7 ( = Dutch). 

* In what Case must ' Thames * be ? Think of the meaning. 



DRILL EXERCISES 135 

Perhaps^ it was St. Albans, ' as sonie learned men have aflirmed. 
Caesar tells about the town of Cassivellaunus in the fifth book of 
the Gallic War. 



§40. {Recapitulation of Nouns 0/ jrd Declension coniinited.) 
Caesar's carap was^ in Kent. There-is also a place in Souih 
Africa named* Caesar's Camp. The tribes of Kent fought bravely 
for {pn-behalf-of) their native-land (§4), but the Trinobantes were 
friends of the Romans and enemies of the Cassi. Accordingly the 
unhappy Britons fought in-vain. At-length (§25) many states 
begged peace from («) Caesar. The conditions of peace wcre 
hard (say rough, §13). After the peace Caesar sold^ a great 
multitude of British captives (§19). Thus many British men and 
women (§20) and children were slaves (§19) of the Romans in the 
first century before the birth of Christ. 



§ 41. {Nouns of jrd Declension continued.) • 

Thus (§16) Caesar carried-off the victory and imposed a tribute 
upon^ the inhabitants of South Britain. The Romans carried-off 
the victory because (§1 5) they were skilled (§15) in war. The tenth 
legion was with Caesar in Britain. Caesar loved the tcnth legion. 
In the first expedition, while the Romans hesitated (§25) to fight, 



' For ' perhaps ' see Preparations § 25. 

' Veruldinium. 

' Remember that the Verb must agree with its Subject [castra). 

* Remember that the Adjective must agree with its Noun. Which is the 
Noun to which the Adjective 'named' belongs? 

' Venum-do, ' l sell,' is a compound of do, 'I give,* meaning liter.illy ' I 
offer for sale,' and forms its Pcrfect hke do. 

•The Adjectives of the 3rd Declension are deferred till §42. 

' Imitate the construction given in § 40 of the story. 



136 DRILL exercises 

the eagle-bearer of the tenth legion leaped ^ into the waves and 
carried (§6) thc Roman eagle (.§ 25) to the land (§4). Accordingly 
the Romans defeated (§24) the Britons on-account-of (§33) the 
pluck of the ea^le-bearer. The Roman eagles were made-of-silver 
(§9) and served as- flags. 



§ 42. {Adjectives of the jrd Declension.) 

(A.) The ancient Biitons were brave men. They fought with' 
admirable pluck. The bodies of the ancient Britons were big and 
strong. The Romans were not so {%33) big as the Britons ; but 
by means of the science of war they were able to carry-oflf 
the victory from the Britons. Cacsar was a distinguished general. 
He had defeated the brave tribes of Belgic Gaul in a short time. 
Victory was sweet to Caesar. 

(B.) Not all* the British states (§40) had fought against Caesar. 
There had never (§25) been an aUiance (§34) of all the tribes of 
Britain against an enemy. It' is wonderful ihat (§41) the Britons 
were-able to fight so (§41) successfully against the conquerors of 
so-many (§40) seas and lands. The name of Caesar was dis- 
tinguished through (§26) the whole (§16) world (§41). The soldiers 
of the tenth legion were veterans. It * is sweet to fight and, if it is 
necessary (§24), to die* for (§40) one's^ native-land. 



»See Ex. §37, note 2 (p. 134). 

''Say 7vere instead-of ; cf. § n of the story (" the skins served as sails.") 

*See Ex. §20, note i (p. 121, on the Ablative without a Preposition). 

''Adjectives meaning ' all/ unlike other Adjectives, generally coine before 
Iheir Nouns in Latin : cf. nole 2, p. iii, and Rule i of Oider, p. lox. 

' No separate word for 'it'; but the Adjective after *is' must be in the 
Neuter Gender, as in §41 of the story. 

• Say ' to expire,' exspirare. 

' Omit the word ' one's ' in translating. 



DRILL EXERCISES 137 

§43. {Adjeclives 0/ jrd Declension conti/iued.) 

The tribes of Belgic Gaul also were warlike.^ Caesar had 
slaughtered (§20) a huge number of the brave Nervii, fighting^ 
against the Romans. The British auxiUaries had been useful to' 
the Veneti. Accordingly Caesar waged-war against the " arrogant 
Britons." And he carriedoff a huge number of British slaves and 
captives. 

"The time is short," says my uncle; "it is necessary (§24) to 
hasten homewards. It* has been pleasaiit to you, as I hope, to 
see a Briiish ship of-war and to walk to the place where Caesar 
fought with the Britons." We all^ approved-of (§41) the opinion 
of my uncle. 



GOD SAVE THE KINa 



' Use ferox, which as the name of a ship in the Channel squadron is trans- 
lated ' the Furious ' in § 42 of the story. All the names of ships given there 
can be used as Adjectives, but niust then not be spelled with capital letters. 

^" Fighting' is an Adjective describing the Nervii. In what Case must it, 
then, be? 

• ' Useful to' is like ' dear to ' {Preparations § 15), 

*See Ex. §42, note 5 (p. 136). 

' Say ' all wc-approvcd.' 



APPENDICES. ^ 

I. — On Adjectives in -NDUS, A, UM and Nouns 
iN -NDUM. 

The Adjectives in -ndus, a, um differ from other Adjectives 
only in the following respects : — 

(i) They are all formed from the stems of Verbs. In EngUsh, 
too, we have many Adjectives formed from Verbs, and some of 
them are similar in meaning to the Latin Adjectives in -ndns, 
a, um ; for instance 'laud-able' (frora 'I laud,' Lat. laudd), 
'lov-able' (in the sense 'worthy to be loved,') *eat-able' (in the 
sense 'fit to be eaten.') 

(2) They cannot always be translated by Adjectives in Enghsh, 
because English gcneraliy has no Adjective with exactly the same 
meaning ; so they have often to be translated by a phrase Uke 
' to-be-loved,' 'tobe-read,' * to-be-eaten.' Sometimes it is con- 
venient to translate them in other ways. 

The foUowing sentences, taken from the story, should be care- 
fully examined. 

Audacia aquiliferi erat laudanda, 'the courage of the eagle-bearer 



^ These Appendices are not intended to be used by tlie pupil except as a 
summary and fuller explanation of some of the constructions wliich have been 
met wilh in the text. But they are written with a view to the neeJs of 
beginners, and are thrown into a form which the writer has found to be 
capable of appealing to the minds even of young pupils, if brought before them 
gradually and on seasonable occasions. 



APPENDICES 139 

was laud-able or praise-woithy ' (§25). Here the Adjeciive 
laudanda (feminine of laudandus, to agree with audacia) is 
formed from the Verb laudo, ' I praise,' and it has the same 
meaning as the English Adjective formed with '-able'or 
'-worthy,' but we may also translate it by ' worthy-to-be 
praised,' or simply ' to-be-praised.' This Adjective, like 
other Adjectives, may be used wilhout the Verb ' to be,' 
and in any Case ; thus we get 

NoM. audacia laudania, ' laudable courage' 
Acc. audftciam laudandavi, ' laudable courage ' 
Gen. audaciae laudandae, ' of laudable courage,' etc 
Hence such a phrase may be made to depend on a 
Preposition, as shown in the next sentence. 

Locus erat idoneus adnavigia applicattda, 'there was a place suitable 
for vessels to-be-brought-to-land ' (24). Here the phrase 
navigia applicanda, ' vessels to-be-brought-to-land ' depends 
on ad in the sense of ' for.' Compare in Enghsh such 
common sentences as ' Ring the bell for the dinner to be 
gut ready.' (Latin ad cenam parandam.) 
The Nouns in -ndum differ from other Nouns only in the 
following respects : — 

(i) They are all formed from the stems of Verbs, just as in 
Enghsh we may form a Noun out of any Verb by adding '-ing.' 
Thus where in English we speak of ' row-ing,' ' walk ing,' 
' visit-ing,' etc, the Romans used the Nouns remigandum, atnbul- 
andum, visitandum, etc. 

(2) They are hke Verbs in so far as they take the same con- 
structions as the Verbs from which they are formed. So, too, do 
the Enghsh Nouns formed from Verbs; thus we speak of 'rowing 
quickly,' ' walking slowly ' (with Adverbs, though sometimes also 
with Adjectives), and 'visiting a friend,' ' exploring a country' 
(with Objects depending on the Nouns in ' -ing '). 



140 APPENDICES 

Labor revngandi magnus erat, ' the labour of rowing was great' 
(§29). Here 7-emigandi '\% the Genitive Case of the Noun 
remigandum formed from rejnigo, * I row.' 

Paratine estis adambulandu/n 1 'are you ready for walking ? ' (§23). 
Here ambulandum is the Accusative Case of the Noun 
formcd from atnbulo, ' I walk,' and depends on c7</meaning 
•'for.' 

Cupidus erat visitandi et explorandi insula?n nostram, ' he was 
desirous of visiting and exploring our island ' (§ 28). Here 
the Genitives of the Nouns visitandum and exploranduni 
take an Object in the Accusative. 

The following sentences, taken from the story, contain furlher 
examples of the above constructions (Adjectives and Nouns). 

Virtus militum erat magnopere laudanda (§29). Here the 
Adjective is quaUfied by an Adverb (as other Adjectives 
may be). 

Navigia novis armis ornanda erant (§31). 

Locus idoneus est ad copias explicandas (§25). 

Naves onerariae aptae erant ad onera transportanda (§32). * 

Rofnani Britannos scientia pugnandi superabant (§30). 

[No example occurs in the story of the Noun in -ndum with est 
denoting 'must' or 'ought.' This is a special use and sense, 
which is best deferred for subsequent study.] 



* Such sentences may also be translated by an entirely different form of 
speech in English ('for deploying forces.') Here 'deploying' is a Noun 
formed from the Verb ' deploy.' But this translation leads to confusion willi the 
use of the Latin Noun in -ndum, and should therefore be avoided so far as 
possible by beginners. 



APPENDICES 141 

II.— HOW TO TRANSLATE ENGLISH PREPOSITIONS 
INTO LATIN. 

Where EngHsh has a Prcposition Latin generally has one also. 

Most of these Latin Prepositions take the Accusative Case, but 

sonie of them (especially ab or ^, ciint, de, ex, in whcn it means 

*in' or 'on,' pro, suh when it means 'under,' and sine^ take the 

Ablative : it should be noted that no Latin Prepositions take the 

Dative or the Genitive. But it has been scen that 'of is generally 

expressed by the Genitive alone, and ' to ' very often by the Dative 

alone; also that 'from,' 'at,' 'in,' ' with,' 'by,' and ' by means of 

are sometimes expressed by the Ablative alone. The foUowing 

rules, based upon examples wliich have occurred in this book, 

will give some guidance as to when the above Prepositions are to 

be translated by Prepositions in Latin and when by a Case without 

any Preposition; but the rules are only an outline, to be fiUcd up by 

future reading, and they deal only with the most important usages. 

OF is generally translated by the Genitive, as in ' the door of 

the country-house,' ianua villae (§1), *the courage of sailors,' 

audacia jtautarum (§2), ' traces of the Romans,' vesiigia Roman- 

orum (§9), 'a task of great labour,' ^/>«,y viagni laboris ( = 'very 

laborious,' §31), 'an abundance of plants,' copia planiarum (§3), 'a 

great number of coins,' magnus numerus nuinmorum (§9).^ 

But (i.) in such phrases as 'some of,' ' many of,' the 'of ' may be 

translated by ex with the Ablative; thus 'some of the 

vessels ' may be translated nonnulla ex navigiis (§ 1 1), 

* many of the tribes,' jnulti ex populis (§ 1 8). 

(ii.) when the phrase ' of ' describes a quality of the 

person or thing spoken of, it is sometimes translated by the 
Ablative without a Preposition ; thus 'men of robust body' 
is homines robusto corpore (§30) : cf. § 43, note on p. 99. 

' It may be noted that the ' of ' in many of these examples does not denote 
possession. 



142 APPENDICES 

TO is generally translated by ad wilh the Accusative (or sonie- 
times by in with the Accusalive, §ii) when it comes after a verb 
of ' going ' or any verb that denotes motion, such as ' bring ' or 
* carry ' or ' send : ' thus ' I walk to the wood ' is ad silvatn ambiik 
(§5). But it is sometimes translated by the Accusative w'..hout a 
Preposition, sometimes by the Dative ; viz. : — 

By the Accusative without a Preposition when it comes before 
the name of a Town : thus ' he brought his vessels to Dover ' is 
navigia Diibras applicavit (§24), 'I walked to London ' is 
Londiniiitn amhulavi. 

By ^he Dative in the following cases : 

(i) when it comes after a verb of 'giving'; thus 'it gives 
delight to Lydia,' is Lydiae laetitiam dat (§5), 'they had 
suppUed auxiliaries to the Gauls ' is Gallis auxilia sub- 
ministraverant (§27). 

(ii) when it comes after the verb ' to be' in the phrase 'there 
is to sonieone ' = 'someone has ' ; thus ' my uncle has coins' 
\% patruo meo nummi sufit (§ 9). 

(iii) when it comes after Adjectives which can take 'to' in 
English, like 'dear,' 'pleasant,' 'useful'; thus 'he is dear 
to us ' is twbis carus est (§15). 

FROM is generally translated by ab or ex with the Ablative ; 
but by the Ablative alone — 

(i) when it comes after certain Verbs and Adjectives with the 
sense of ' free ' ; thus ' he is free from miiitary service ' is 
militia vacat (§ 6), 'free from lessons ' is liber scholis (§ 1 2). 

(ii) when it comes before the name of a Town and after a 
Verb of * going ' or any Verb that denotes motion ; tlius 
' they will arrive from Dover ' is Dubris adventabunt 
(§22). 



APPENDICES T43 

IN or AT^ \s generally traiislated by in with the Ablative ; but 
by the Ablative alone — 

(i) when it comes before a Noun denoting time, such as ' day,' 
'month,' 'year,' ' century,' 'hour'; ihus 'in the second 
century ' is seaindo saeculo (§ i o), ' in the next year ' is 
proximo anno (§28), 'at what o'clock?' is quota horal (§21). 
(ii) when it cames before a Noun denoting price or value ' : 
thus 'at a great price ' is ^tiagno pretio (§ 9). 

WITH is translated by cum with the Ablative when it means 
' together with ' or ' in company with ' (as in ' I walk with my 
aunt,' cum amita mea ambulo, §3, or ' fighting with the Romans,' 
cufn Romams pugnantes, §43) ^ ; but by the Ablative alone in 
other senses ; viz : — 

(i) when 'with' means 'bymeans of;' thus 'they used to 
fight with spears and arrows ' is hastis et sagittis 
pugnabant (§18): here 'spears and arrows' are the 
instruments with which they fought. Similarly when 
* with ' comes after Adjectives meaning ' fi.lled ' ; thus 
' fiUed with victims' is plenus victimis (§20)^, ' crowded 
with children' is creber pueris et puelHs (§15). 

(ii) when the phrase ' with ' answers the question 

' how ? ' ; thus ' they used to fight with great courage ' is 
magna audacia pugnabant. Here ' with great courage ' 
describes the manner in which they fought. 

^ When ' at ' comes before the name of a Town, it is translated by the 
Locative without a Preposition ; but no example of this Case occurs in this 
book. The Locative, however, is the same in form as the Ablative, except in 
the Ist and 2nd Declension, Singular Number. 

^ Sometimes M«a 'together' is added, as in ' together with a multilude 0/ 
Gallic auxiliaries, una cum multiludiite aiixiliorum Galliiorum (§ 28). 

* But just as in English we may say not only ' filled ivith ' but also ' full of,^ 
so in Latin pUnus may take the Genitive ; thus ' full of joys ' is plenus 
gaudiorum (f 13). 



144 APPENDICES 

(iii) when the phrase 'with ' answers the question 

' why ? ' thus ' the cUmate was hideous with rains ' is 
caebim plnviis foediiin erat (§17). Here 'with rains' 
means ' because of rains.' 

(iv) when the phrase ' with * describes a quality of the 

person or thing spoken of '; thus 'a man with a robust 
body' is homo fobusto corpore (§30), 'aboy with blue 
eyes ' is puer oculis caeruieis. 

B Y MEANS OF is sometimcs translated hy per ('through') with 
tlie Accusative, but generally by the Ablative without a Preposition: 
thus ' they used to fasten their ships by means of iron chains ' is 
naves catenis fej-reis deligahant (§ 33), ' he hastened to the Thames 
by means of uninterrupted marches' \% continuis itineribus ad 
Tamesain properavit (§ 38). 

^F is sometimes translated by ab or a with the Ablative, but 
generally by the Ablative without a Preposition : thus ' by reason 
( = for thc sake) of commcrce ' is mercaturae causa (§ l 9), cf. animi 
causa (§20); 'by land and by sea' is terra marique (§43). 

III.— GENERAL RULES OF ORDER. 

RuLE I. — Anything that goes with a Xo'm (excepting a Pre- 
position)is generally put after that Noun in Latin ; thus 'villa 
bella,^ ' villa amitae meae.' Exxept Numeral Adjectives and 
Adjectives meaning 'all,' 'some,' ' many,' 'few.'* 

RuLE 2. — Anything that goes with a Verb or an Adjective or 
an Adverb is generally put before that Verb, Adjective or Adverb 
in Latin ; thus ^ saepe specto,' ';w« specto,' ' scapham specto,' ' /« 
j<ra///(3 navigo ' ; ';w«magnus'; '«<?«saepe.' 

* Demonslralive Adjcclives (moaning 'iliis' or ' llvat ') and Intcrrogative 
Adjectives (meaning ' wliich?' or ' what?') also precede their Nouns in Latin, 
as in English ; but the Demonslialivcs do not occur in this book. An Inter- 
logative occurs in quota hoia ? 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY. 

The words printed in Llack type are essentiai words which need tobe learned 
by heartj as occuring most often in the text and for the sake of their im- 
portance. 

Words of the third declension have the stem inserted in brackets, except 
where it is the same as the Nom. Sing. (e.g. arbor). To words like tiavis the 
Gen. Piur. is given. Genders are given where irregular accordingto ihe rules 
on p. 75 and p. 129 (m. =masculine, f.=feminine, n. = neuter). 

The figures i, 2, 3 denote the declension or conjugation. 



ab or 5 (with Abl.), from; ab 
occidente parte (§35), off the 
West side, on the West 

ab-sum, ab-esse, a-fuT, latti distanty 
I atti absent 

abundo, l, I ahoitnd [Ah\.=in) 

accommodatus, a, um, suited [ac- 
comodated] 

acciiso, I, I accuse 

acutus, a, um, sharp [acute] 

ad (with Acc), to ; sometimes yi»r 
or at or near (see §§ 15, 23, 24) 

adhuc, hilherto 

admirabilis, 3, adj., adinirable 

ad-8um, ad-esse, ad-fui, / am 
present 

adulescentulus, 2, youn^ man 

adventS, i, I arrive 

adversus, a, um, adverse 

aedificium, 2, huildiiig [edifice) 

aedificS, i, I build 

acr (afir-), 3, m., air 

aeneus, a, um, made of copfer 

aes (aer-), 3, n., copper or hrass 

aestas (aestat-), 3, summer 

aetas (-tat-), 3, a^^e 

affirmO, i, I affirm, state 

atnictu, I, / T^rifr/t [afflict] 

agellus, 2,farm, estate 

ager, ngr-um, -I, -6, 2, field 

agger, 3, mouiid 

agricola, \, farnier 

albus, a, um, white 



Alexander, Alexandr-um, -T, -o, 2, 

Alexatider 
aliqu.indo, soitie day 
aliquantum, a consideraHe aitiount 
alius, alia, aliud, other (Gen. and 

Dat. Sing. irregular) 
alter, altcra, alterum, another, a 

secotid (Gen. and Dat. Sing. 

irregular) 
altuB, a, um, high, lofty [alti-tude] 
amabo te, please 
ambuliiiio (-ion-), 3, vjalk 
ambulo, I, I -valk 
amlcitia, l, friendship 
amicUB, 2,friend 
amita, I, aunt 
am8, I, I love, Hke 
amphitheairum, 2, amphitheatre 
an, or (in a queslion) 
ancilla, I, maid-servant 
ancora, i, anchor 
Anderida silva, the Andredsweald 
Anglicus, a, um, Etif^lish 
angulus, 2, ani^le, coriur 
animuB, 2, tiiind: aninuts ingratus, 

iiigratitude 
annns, 2, year [annual] 
ante (with Acc. ), hefore 
antea (Adverb), hefore 
antiquua, a, um, ancient 
AniOnius, 2, AiUony 
anxius, a, um, anxious 
aper, apr-um, -I, -6, 2, wild boaf 



146 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY 



apertus, a, nm, open 

applicO, I, I bring to land [apply] 

appropinqnO, i, I approach 

aptns, a, um,yf//'<ri/[apt] 

apud (with Acc. ), in the house of, 

French chez 
aqna, water, i [aquarium] 
aquila, i, eagle 
aquilifer, 2, eagle-bearer 
ara, i, altar 
arbor, 3, f., tree 
area, i, open space [area] 
arena, i, sand 

argenteus, a, um, made of silver 
argentum, ^^^Vz^^r^French 'argent'] 
aries (ariet-), 3, m., ram 
arithmetica, i, arithmetic 



anna, neut. plur., 2, arms, fittingi 

armatus, a, um, armed 

armentum, 2, herd 

arS, I, I plough 

arrogans (arrogant-), 3, adj., arr(h 

gant 
asper, aspera, asperum, rough 
ater, atra, atrum, dark 
atqne, and also, aye and 
audacia, l, coura^e, audacity 
aureus, a, um, golden 
ausculto, I, I listen 
autem, however 
auxilium, 2, help, aid 

auxilia (plur.), auxiliaries 
avaritia, i, avarice 



B. 



baca, I, berry 

barbarus, a, um, barharous 

basilica, l, hasilica, church 

beatus, a, um, happy 

Belgae, i, pl., Belgians, a tribe in 
the North of Gaul and also in 
South Britain (Hampshire) 

Belgicus, a, um, Belgian 

Belgium, 2, Belgium 

bellicosus, a, um, warlike 



bell5, I , / wage war 

bellum, 2, war 

bellus, a, um, beautiful, j»Uy, pretty 

[French bel, belle] 
bene, well ; bene ambula, § 23 
bos (bov-), 3, m. or f., ox 
bre%ns, 3, adj., brief, short 
Britannia, i, Brilaiii 
Britannicus, a, um, British 
Britannus, 2, Briton 



c. 



C. =Gaius (Gaium, Gai, Gaio) 
cachinno, i, I laugh 
caelum, 2, sky, climate 
caeruleus, a, um, blue 
Caesar, 3, Caesar 
Caledonia, i, Scotland 
Caledonius, 2, Caledoniar. 
calor (calor-), 3, heat 
Cambria, i, Wales 
campus, 2, plain 
Canlium, 2, Kent 
cantO, I, I sing 
capillus, 2, hair 
captivus, 2, captive 
capt5, l, I catch 



caput (capit), 3, n., head, chapter 

carina, l, keel 

c3ruB, a, um, dear 

casa, I, cottage 

Cassi, 2, a tribe in Hertfordshire 

Cassivellaunus, 2, King of ihe Cassi 

in Hertfordshire 
castanea, i, chestnut-tree 
castellum, 2,fort [castle] 
ca«tra, neut. pl., 2, camp 
catena, i, chain 
catulus, 2, dog 
cauaa, i, cause, reason : causa, hy 

reason, for the sake 
celeriter, quickly 



ALPHABETICAL VQCABULARY 



147 



Celta, I, Celt 

cena, i, supper, late dinner 

cenO, I, I sup, dine 

certamen (-min-), 3, contest 

certe, at any raie 

cervus, 2, stag 

ceteri, ae, a, the others, tke rest 

cetera (n.) = Erig. 'etcetera' 
Christus, 2, Christ 
Christianus, a, um, Christian 
cibus, 2,food 
circiter, about 
circum (Preposition with Acc. ; or 

Adverb), arottnd 
circum-do, -dare, -dedi, I surround 
clvitaa (-tat-), 3, state [city] 
clades, 3, disaster 
cl&rus, a, um, bright ox famous 
classiarii, 2, scaiiien, men of the Jleet 
classis (Gen. Pl. claBsium), T),fleet 
clivus, 2, hill, do~cn 
cohors (cohort-), 3, cohort 
coUi8(Gen. PI. collium), 3, m., hill 
coUoco, I, I place [locate] 
colonia, I, colony 
coioratus, a, um, sun-hurnt 

[coloured] 
coloro, I, I colour 
coluniba, i, dove, pigeon 
commemoro, i, / mention ("com- 

memorate] 
commentarii, 2 pl., notes, covimen- 

taries 
comparS, i, I get together, prepare 
CGUiprobo, I, I approve 
concursio (-ion), 3, engagcment 

[ex-cursion] 
condicio (-ion-), 3, condition 
condiscipulus, 2, schoclfellow 
confirmo, i, I estahlish [confirm] 



confusus, a, um, confused 
congregO, i, / gather togethef 

[congregation] 
consecratus, a, um, consecrated 
consSbrina, I, cousin (§ 5) 
consocio, I, I ally 
constantia, I, constancy, firmness 
con-sto, -stare, -stiti, / consist [con, 

together, sto, / stand] : constat 

(3rd person) = /V knoivn 
consulto, on purpose [by consulta- 

tion] 
continuus, a, um, continucd, un- 

interrupted 
contra (wilh Acc), against 
copia, I, abundance 

copiam do, I give opportunity 
copiae {^\\xx.), forces 
corium, 2, skin 

corpuB (corpor-), 3, body [corpor-al] 
corvus, 2, croiv 
creber, crebra, crebrum, crowded 

(Abl. =with), frequent 
cremo, l, I burn [cremation] 
creo, I, I create 

crucio, I, I torture [ex-cruciating] 
crustulum, 2, cake 
culpo, I, I blame 
cullura, I, tillage, cultivation, cul 

ture 
cum (with Abl.), together with 

'vith 
cum, whcn 
cupide, eagerly 

cupidus, a, um, desirous, eager 
cur, why 
cuia, I, care 
CurO, I , / care for, attcnd to, pro- 

vide (§ 22) 
cuslos (cuslud-), 3, guard,guardian 



de (with Abl.), about, down from 

dC-bellr), i, I defcat 

decimus, a, um, tcnth 

dt-clarri, i, I deciare 

declino, / turn aside [decline] 



D. 



defeclio (-ion-), 3, defection 
defcnsor (defensor-), 3, dcfcnder 
dclcctanuntum, 2, delight 
delectS, i, J delight 
delibero, i, I dciiberaie 



148 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY 



deligO, I, I fasten 

ad ancoram deligO, I anchor 
demonstro, i, I point out 
deneg5, i, I say no [deny] 
densns, a, um, dense, thick 
deploro, I, I deplore, lament 
derlvatus, a, um, derived 
de-8um, de-esse, de-ful, / am 

wanting 
deas, 2, god 

dexter, dextra, dextrnm, right 
dextra, i, right hand 
dico, dlcere, dixl, 3, I say 
digitus, 2,yf;/.o'(?r [digit] 
discipulus, 2, pupil [disciple] 
discordia, i, quarrel, discord 
disputo, l, I dispute 
di-sto, I, I am distant 
difi, long, for a long time 
diumus, a, um, ofthe day 
diversus, a, um, diverse, different (a, 
from) 



dO, dare, dedi, / give, set, put (in 

fugam, tofiight) 
doctuB, a, um, leamed [doctor] 
domesticus, a, um, internal [dom- 

estic] 
domina, i, mistress [dame] 
domus (irregular, /), house, home 

domi, at home 

domum, homeivards (home) 
Druidae, l, pl., Druids 
dubitS, I, I hesitate, douht 
Dubrae, I, pl., Dever 
ducentl, ae, a, t-wo hundred 
dulcis, 3, adj., sweet, pleasant 
dum, while 
duo, dnae, duo, two 
duodecimus, a, um, twelfth 
duodesexagesimus, a, um, s8th 
dux (duc-), 3, leader, general 



E. 



ecce, hehold 

ego, / 

egregie, excellently 

eques (equit-), 3, horse-soldier 

equito, i, I ride 

equus, 2, horse 

erro, i, / err 

esca, lyfood, eating 

esse, to be 

essedarius, 2, charioteer 

essedum, 2, chariot 

et, and : 

et . . . et, both . . . and 
etiam, also, even 
euge, bravo \ {e in Plautus) 



ex (with Abl.), out offrom 
excavo, I, I excavate 
exclamo, i, I exclaim 
existimo, i, /c(?wi/(/fr [estimate] 
expeditio (-i5n-), 3, expedition 
explico, I, 1 diploy, arrange 
exploro, I , / explore 
exporto, I, I export, carry out 
expugnO, I, I storm, take by stor^" 
exspectatiS (ion-), 3, expectation 
exspecte, I, I extcct, await 
ex-8t5, -stare, -stiti, / exist, re- 

main, am extant (§ 39 = stand 

out) 



F. 



fabric5, I, I manufacture [fabricate] 
fabula, I, play, drama [fable] 
facinus (facinor-), 3, deed, achieve- 

ment 
fagus, 2, f., beeck 



fanum, 2, shrine 
fallgatus, a, um, //m/ [fatigued] 
femina, i, woman [hence 'femin- 
ine'] 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY 



149 



fenestra, i, window 
fera, i , -wild beast 
fere, almost, about 
feriae, i pl., holidays 
ferlna, \,flesh ofwildanimals, game 
ferox (feroc-), 3, adj., warlike 
ferratus, a, um, filtedwith iron 
ferreus, a, um, made o/iron 
ferus, a, urn, savage 
feetinCS, i, I hurry 
fidus, a, \XVA, faithful 
fii^ura, i, figttre 
filia, I, d.ttii^hter 
filius, 2 (Voc. fili), son 
finis, 3, eiiJ ; Plur. fines, m., 
(Gen. finium), loundaries 
firmiludo ( tudin-), ■^, fir/itness 
firmo, I, J strengthen [make firmj 
fl.xvus, a, um, yellow 
tlO, I, I blow (said of the wind) 
Humen (-min-), 3, river 
fluvius, 2, river 



Gallia, i, Gaul 

Gallicus, a, um, Gallic : fretum 

Galiicum, the English channel 
gallina, i, hen 
Gallus, 2, m Gaul, an inhabitant of 

Gaul 
gallus, 2, cock 
gaudium, 2,joy, delight 
gemma, i, gem, preciotts stoite 
generosus, a, um, nobly born 
gens (gent-), 3, race [gentile] 



G. 



focus, 2, hearth 

foedus, a, um, hideotis 

fomia, i,form, shape 

formidO, l, I fear 

fortasse, perhaps 

fortis, 3, adj., brave, strong 

fortiter, bravcly 

fortuna, i, fortune, fate 

Francogallicus, a, um, French 

frenum, 2, bridle 

fretum, 2, channel, arm of the sea 

frugifer, fiugifera, frugiferuni, fruil- 

ful [fruit-bearing] 
frtimentum, 2, com 
frustra, in vain 
fuga, \,flight 
fugo, I, I puttoflight, rout 

fugatus, a, um, routed 
fundamentum, 2, foundation 
funis (Gen. Plur. funium), 3, m., 

rope 



genuB (gener-), 3, ^/mj' [gener-al] 
Germanicus, a, um, German (adj.) 
Germanus, 2, German (noun) 
gl5ria, \, glory, fame 
Graecia, i, Greece 
GraecuB, a, um, Greck 
gramineus, a, um, grassy 
grandis, 3, adj., (5?> [grand] 
gratuB, a, um, pleasing 
guberno, i , / steer, guide [govern] 
gusto, I, / taste 



H, 



habito, 1, / dwell ', with Acc, / 

inhabit 
hasta, I, spear 
herba, \,grass, herb 
liil)crnia, I, Ireland 
llilicrnicus, a, um, Irish 
hic, here, at this point 
hiema (hiem), 3, winter 
Hispania, 1, Spain 
historicus, a, um, historical 
hodie, today, at the present day, 

nowadays 



hodiernus, a, um, of the present day 

homd (homin), 3, vian 

hOra, I, hour 

hortus, 2, garden 

hostia (Gen. Plur. hosiium), 3, 

eneiny 
huiusmodi, ofthis kind 
humanus, a, um, human, ('vilized 
humo, I, / bury 



150 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY 



iam, alreaJy, noio, even 

ianua, i, door, gate 

ibi, there 

idoneus, a, Vkra,fitted, suitable 

ieiunus, a, um, hungry 

ientaculum, 2, breakfast 

igitur, therefore, then 

ignavus, a, um, co^vardly 

ignoro, \, I do not kno~u [ignore] 

ignotus, a, um, unknou/n 

ille, illa, illud, yon, that one 

illic, yonder 

illustro, I, I light up [illustrate] 

imber (imbr-), 3, shower ofrain 

immigro, I, I immigrate 

imperStor (imperator), 3, general 

[emperor] 
inipcrium, 2, command\txa^\x€\ 
impero (with Dat.), I itnpose (upon) 
impiger, impigra, impigrum, 

active (not sluggish) 
impigre, actively, bravely 
impius, a, um, unnattiral [impious] 
impl6r5, i, I i?nplore 
importo, i , / import, carry in 
impugno, i, I attack 
in (with Abl.), in or on 

(with Acc. ), itito or onto 
incito, I, I urge, urge on, incite 
incola, i, inhabitant 
incommodum, 2, disaster 
incullus, a, um, uncultivated 



inde, thenct 

infinitus, a, um, infinite 

ingens (ingent-), 3, adj., huge 

ingratus, a, um, unpleasing, un- 

grateful 
inhumanus, a, um, uncivilized 
inopia, i, 'want, poverty 
inquam, say I, I say ; inquit, says 

he, he says ; inquimus, we say ; 

inquiunt, they say 
insectatio (-ion-), 3, pursuit 
infligniB, 3, adj., distinguished 
in stO, -stSre, -stitl (with Dat.), 1 

pursue 
insula, i, island 
inter (with Acc), between or during 

or among 
interdum, sauietimes 
interea, meanwhile 
interior (interiOr-), 3, interior, inner 
interrogo, i, I ask, enquire 
intervalhim, 2, interval 
intra (wiih Acc. ), within 
intro, I, I enter 
irrigo, I, I water [irrigate], §6 
ita, thus 

itaque, accordingly, therefore 
iter (itiner-), 3, n., march 
iterum, a second time 
iudicS, I, I judge 
iustus, a, \xm,just, proper 
iuvat (3rd pers. sing. ) it delights 



labor (labOr-), 3, labotir, toil 
labOro, I , / labour, am in difficulties 
laetitia, \, delight, pleasure 
lamir.a, I, plate 
Latiuus, a, um, Latin 
latus, a, um, wide, broad 
latus (later-), 3, side [later-al] 
laudandus, a, um, laudable 
laudO, I, I praise 
lavO, I, 1'erf. irregular, I wask 
l§gStU8, 2, lieutenant-general 
legiO (iOn-), 3, legion 



lenis, 3, adj ., gentle [lenient] 
lente, slowly 

levo, I, I lighten, relieve (§ 5) 
libenter, gladly, wilHngly 
liber, libr-um, -i, -0, 2, book 
liber, llbera, llberum,/r;,f (some- 

times with Abl. =from) 
liberi, 2 pl., children (properly an 

adjective meaning " frce ones," 

i.e., children of freeborn 

parents) 
lineus, a, um, madt offiax 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY 



15« 



lingua, I, tongue, language 
llnum, 2,Jlax 

littera, i, leller (of the alphabet) 
Htterarius, a, um, connected with 

letters (lilterae), literary 
litus (litor-), 3, coast 
locus, 2, place (ph loca, «. ), or 

passage of a book (pl. loci, ///.) 
Londinium, 2, LonJon 
longe, far 



longitudo (-tudin), 3, lenglh [longi- 

tude] 
longuB, a, um, loug 
hicrum, 2, gain, profit 
lucus, 2, grove 

ludus, 2, game or elementary school 
Ifina, I, moon 
lupus, 2, VJOlf 
luscinia, i, nightingale 
lui (luc), 3, light 



M. 



machina, i, machine 
magister, 2, schoolmaster, teacher 
magistra, I, school-mistress, teacher 
magnificus, a, um, magnificent 
magnitudo (-tudin-), 3, size, magni- 

titde 
magnopere ( = magno opere), greatly 
magnus, a, um, great, large 
maior (mSiSr-), 3, leirger, greater 
mando, l, I commit, entrust 
mane (indeclinable), viorning, pro- 

perly in the morning 
mare (dechned §36), 3, sea 
margarita, I , pearl [.Margaret] 
maritimus, a, um, ofthe sea, mari- 

time 
materia, i, //w^^r [material] 
mathematicus, a, um, mathematical 
maxime, chiefly 
me, me 

mecum, with me 
mediocriter, moderately, tolerahly 
mediterraneus, a, um, midland, in- 

land: mediterranea, pl., n., 

the midlands 
medius, a, um, mid, middle 
meinLruni, 2, limb [member] 
mercalura, i, commerce [merchan- 

dise] 
inergus. 2, sca-^uh 
meridianus, a, uni, southcrn [from 

merldies, mid-day] 



metallum, 2, metal 

meus (Voc. nii), mea, meum, my 

migro, l, I migrate 

mihi, to me 

milea (mllit-), 3, soldier 

milia, 3, miles, lit. thousands {oj 
paces) 

militia, l, military service 

mllito, l, I scrve 

ministro, I, /fl//^«i/ [minister] 

mlrus, a, um, wonderful 

miser, misera, miserum, unhappy, 
miserable 

mobihtas (-tat-), 3, mohility 

Mona, I, Isle of Anglesey 

monstrans (monsUant-), 3, adj., 
pointing 

monstrO, i, I shoiu, point 

monumentum, 2, monument 

mora, i, detay 

mortuus, a, um, dead 

mos (mor-), 3, custom 

mox, /;; due course {sooti) 

mullitCRiO (-tudin-), 3, multitude 

multus, a, um, much: multi, ac, a, 
many ; multum (adv.), much, 
very much, very ; multo, by 
much (multo maior, inuch 
greater, lit. greater by much) 

nirinilio, 3, buhcark 

murmurO, I, I muimur 

mflrus, 2, wall 



52 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABVLARY 



N. 



nam, for 

narro, i, I tell, narrate 

natiO (-iOn-), 3, tribe [nation] 

nato, I, I swim, batlte 

natura, i, nature 

natus, a, um, bom 

ante Christum natum =B. C. 

post Christum natum = A. D, 
nauta, i, sailor 
navigatiO (-ion-), 3, voyage 
nSvigium, 2, vessel, ship 
navigO, i, /53// [navigate] 
nSvis (Gen. Plur. nSvium), 3, ship; 

navis longa, ship ofwar 
-ne marks a qnestion 
nebula, i, cloiid 
nec (or neque) 7ior, and 7iot 

nec . . . nec, neither . . . 7ior 
necesse, necessary {jyzX.=for') 
Nervii, a tribe in Belgium 
nidifico, i, I btiild a nest 
nidus, 2, nest 

niger, nigra, nigrum, Wa^^[nigger] 
nihil, nothing 
nimis, too 

nisi, unlesSy if... not, except 
nobis, to us 

nobiscum, witA us 



noctu, by night, in the nighttime 
ni)Cturnus, a, um, of the night 
nOmen (min-), 3, name [nominal] 
nominatus, a, um, named 
nOmino, i, I name, call 
nOn, 7iot 

nondum, not yet 

nOn iam, no longer, not any longer 

nOnne ( = non -f ne), not ? 

nonnulll, ae, a, some [non, not, 
nuUi, ;w//tf] 

nSnnumquam, sometimes (lit. not 
never) 
nonus, a, um, ninth 
nos, ive or us, ourselves 
noster, nostra, nostrum, our 
notus, a, um, kiioivn 
novus, a, um, new 
nox (noct-), 3, night 
nudo, I, I strip, deprivt (Abl. =of) 
nulluB, a, um, not any 
num, whether, marking a question 
nnmeruB, 2, number 
nummuB, 2, coin 
numquam, never 
nunc, now 

nuntio, i, I announce 
nuper, recently, lately, not long ago 



o. 



obscurO, I, I obscure 

obses (obsid-), 3, hostage 

occidens (occident-), 3, the West 

occulto, I, I hide 

occupo, I, I seize [occupy] 

oceanus, 2, ocean 

octingenti, ae, a, eight hundred 

ocloginta, eighty 

oculuB, 2, eye 

officium, 2, dtity 

omnia, Neut. Plur. of omnes, all 

things, everything 
omnino, altogether 
omnis, 3, adj., every\ Plur. omnes, 

m. and f., omnia, n., all 
oner&rius, a, um, of burden 



onus (oner-), 3, hurden [ex-oner-ate] 
opera, I, attention, study 
oppidum, 2, town 
opportune, in the nick of time 
oppugnO, I, J attack 
optime, excellently, hurrah I 
opus (oper-), 3, work [oper-ation] 

opus (wiih Abl.), med 

quid opus, what med 
Ora, I, shore 
orbis, 3, m., circle [orb] ; orbis 

terrarum = the world 
ordO (-din-), 3, m., raw^ [ordin-ary] 
oriens(orient-), 3, ///<f .£"aj/[oricntal] 
orlgO (origin-), 3, origin 
oriundus, a, um, sprung 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY 



»53 



umandus, a, um.yf/ to be equipped 
omatus, a, um, ortiamented 
ornQ, I, I equip, ad-orn 



0r8, I, I ask, entreat 

ostrea, i, oyster 

ovis (Gen. Plur. ovium), 3, skeep 



pacatus, a, um, subdued, pacified 
palus (palud-), 3, rnarsh 
paratus, a, Mm, prepared, ready 
parO, I, I prepare, prepare the way 

for (§ 20) 
pars (part), 3, part 
parvus, a, um, small, little 
patria, i , country, fatherland 
patruus, 2, uncle 
pauci. ae, ti,few, afew 
pauluin, a little 
pax (p§c-), 3, peact 
pecunia, i, money 
pedes (pedit-), ^, foot-solJier 
pellis (Gen. Plur. pellium), 3, skin, 

hidi 
per (with Acc), through, or during 
pergrandis, 3, adj., very big 
pergratus, a, um, very pleasing 
periculosus, a, um, perilous, danger- 

ous 
periculum, 2, peril, danger 
peritus, a, um, ski//ed (Gen. =in) 
perlucidus, a, um, transparent 

[pellucid] 
perturbo, l, / perturb, disturb, 

throw into confusion 
pSs (ped-), 3, m.,foot; pcdibus, on 

foot 
pharus, 2, f., light-house 
piger, pigra, pigrum, /azy, s/uggish 
pila, I, ba//\^\\\'\ 
pinus, 2 (partly 4), f., pine 
piscatorius, a, \xm, fshing 
plane, utter/y, quite 
planta, i , p/ant 
planus, a, \xm,flat [plane] 
plSnus, a, um, with Gen. /«//, 

wilh Abl. fi//ed 
plerumque, most/y, genera//y 
plumbum, 2, /ead 
plus (plur-), more [hence ' Plural '] 
pluvia, I, rain 
po6ta, I, poet 



pSmum, 2, app/e 

pondus (pondcr-), 3, ■weight 

populuB, 2, tribe [a people] 

porcus, 2, pig [pork] 

portO, I , / carry 

poBSum ( = pot-sum), p)osse( = pot 

esse), potuT, I am ab/e 
post (with Acc), after, behind 
postquam, after ( = when) 
poatridie, on the next day 
poatulO, I, I demand 
praecipito, i, //:«/-/ [prccipitate] 
praecipuus, a, um, especia/, par- 

ticu/ar 
praeclSruB, a, xxm, famous 
praeda, 1, prey, booty 
praefectus, 2, officer [prefect] 
praefectus classis, admira/ 
praeparo, l, I prepare 
prae-sto, -stare, -stiti, / perform, 

exhibit 
prae-sum, -esse, -fui (wiih Dat.), 

/ am in command of 
praetcrea, besides 
prandium, 2, /umh 
pretium, 2, price 
primo, at first 
primus, a, um, yfr.f/ 
princeps (princip-), 3, prince 
prior (prior-), ^, former [prior] 
prO (with Abl.), instead of, for 
procella, l, sterm 
proconsul, 3, proconsu/, governor 
procul, far 
proelium, 2, beUt/e 
profundus, a, um, deep [profound] 
promunturium, 2, promontory 
prope (with Acc), ruar 
properO, i, I hasten 
propinquus, a, um, neighbouring 
propior, propius, nearer 
propositum, 2, propcsa/ 
propter (wilh Acc), on atcourti ef 
propulso, I, I drive back 



154 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY 



prospere, success/ully 

prO sum, -esse, -ful (with Dat.)) 

/ am helpfnl, do good 
provoIO, I, I dash/orth 
proximus, a, um, nearest, next, last 
pruina, i,frost 
puella, I , girl 
puer, 2, boy 
pugna, lyfight, battlt 



pugnans (pugnant-), 3, adj.,/^A//«^ 

pugno, I, I fight 

pulcher, pulchra, pulchrum,yf«tf, 

beautiful, handsome 
pulchre, beautifully 
puppis (Gen. Plur. puppium), 3, 

stern, poop 
puto, I, I fancy, think, suppose 



qnam, how, as, than 

quando, when 

quantopere, how much 

quare ( = qua re, by whal thing\ 7vhy 

quartus, a, \xm, fourth 

quattuor, fdur 

quattuordecim, fourteen 

quia, because 

quingenti, ae, s.,five hun red 

quinquagesimus, a, um, fijtieth 



qmnque, five 

quintus, a, \xm,fifth 

quo, whilher, to which 

quod, that 

quOmodS, how 

quondam, once on a time, formerly 

quoque, too, also, even 

tum quoque, then too, even then 
quota hora est ? what o'clock is it ? 

quota hora, at what o\l»ck ? 



R. 



recreo, l, Irefresh (nie, myselj) 

recte, rightly 

redambulo, i, I walk back 

regalis, 3, adj., royal 

reglna, i, queen 

regulus, 2, ruler, petty kittg 

reliquiae, I, pl., relics 

reliquus, a, um, the rest, the re- 

maining 
remigo, i, I row 
remotus, a, um, remote 
remuB, 2, oar 
reparo, l, I refit, repair 
reportO, i , / carry eff (or back) 
reservO, I, I reserve 
revera, really 
revoco, i, I recall 



rex (reg-), 3, king 
Rhenus, 2, the Rhine 
ripa, I, bank 
rivus, 2, stream [river] 
robur (robor-), 3, oak, slrength 
rSbuatus, a, um, robusl, sturdy 
R5ma, I, Rome 
ESmSnuB, a, um, Roman 
rosa, I, rose, rose-tree 
rostrum, 2, beak, ram 
rota, I, wheel 
ruber, rubra, rubrum, red 
ruinae, i, pl., ruins 
rusticus, a, um, rustic 
Rulupiae, l, pl., Richhrough 
Rutuplnus, a, um, belonging to 
Richborough 



Bacer, sacra, sacrum, sacred 

sacra, pl. n., sacred rites 
■atrificC, I, I satrifict 



s- 



saeculum, 2, century 

BAepe, often 

■aevuB, a, um, savage, cru*l 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABUt^ARY 



^l^ 



iaffilfa, I, arrow 
salutO, I, I salute, greet 
satiatus, a, um, satisfied 
satia, sufficiently, enough 
scapha, I, boat [skifT] 
schola, I, school ; pl. lessons 
scientia, i, science, knowledge 
Bcopulus, 2, cliff, rock 
ScOiicus, a, uni, Scottish 
scri[)lito, I, I write, scribhle 
se, hiiiiself, themselves : inter se, 
ainong thcinselves, with one antlhc 
secundus, a, um, second 
seJ, bitt 

senteniia, i, opinion 
sCparo, I, I separate 
scptentriOnCs, the North 
septimus, a, um, sez'enth 
scptingentl, ae, a, seven hundred 
Bepulchrum, 2, toinb, septdchre 
serenus, a, um, clear [serene] 
serO, late 

servO, I, I save, preserve, watch 
servuB, 2, siave 
sescenti, ae, a, six hundred 
sl, if 

sic, so, thus, as foUows 
Bicut, as (lit. so as,just aj) 
signum, 2, si^n,fiag 
silva, I, wood,forest 
simulficrum, 2, image 
8ine (with Abl.), without 
situs, a, um, situated 
sive . . . sive, whether . , . or 
socictas (-tat-), 3» alliance [society] 



sOl, 3, the sun 

solum, 2, soi/ 

BOlum, on/y 

somnio, i, I dream 

sonus, 2, sound 

spectO, I, I see, watch, gate ai 

specula, i, watch-tower 

BperO, I, I hope 

splendor (splendOr-), 3, sp/endour 

spumifer, spumifera, spumiferum, 

foainy [spuma, foam, -fer, 

bearing'^ 
spiimo, I, I foam 
slabilitas (-lat-) 3, slabilily 
Btatio (-ion-) 3, station, roaJstead 
slalura, I, hcight, stature 
stella, I, star 
8to, stSre, Btetl, i, I stand 
studiosus, a, \xm, fond, studious 
stultitia, i,fo//y 
Bub (wilh Abl.), under, down in ; 

(with Acc), dowH into, down 

to, up to 
subito, sudden/y 
subministro, i, I supp/y 
sudis (Gen. Plur. sudium), 3, stake 
sum, eBse, ful, I am 
summus, a, um, chief 
Buper (with Acc), over, above 
superior (superiOr-), 3, previous, 

past ; superior, victorious 
Bupero, I, I surpass, overcome 
BUUB, a, um, his (or //;.; own), their 

(or their own) ; sui, his (or 

their) own men 



T. 



taberna, l, inn [tavern] 

tam, so : tam . . quam, so . . as 

tamen, nevertheless, hoivcver 

Tamesa, I, m., I hames 

tandem, at /ength 

tantum, so much, or on/y 

te, tliee, you ; tecum, with thee, 

with you 
tegimen (-min-), 3, covering 
tempero, i, I coo/, temper 



tempestas (-tat-), 3, tempest, weather 
tempus (tempor-), 3, time [tempor- 

ary] 
tenebrae, I, Plur., darkmss 
terra, i, /and 
tertius, a, um, third 
tertius decimus, thirteenth 
testimonium, 2, testimony, evidenct 
testudO (tudin-), 3, tortoise-she//, 

she/ter 



■56 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULAR Y 



tintinnabuluin, 2, bell 
tonans (tonanl-), 3, adj., thundering 
tormentum, 2, hiirling machine 
tot (indeclinable adj.), so many 
tOtuB, a, um (Gen. and Dat. Sing. 

irregular), whole 
tranquillus, a, um, cabn, tranquil 
trans (wiih Acc), across 
transportS, i, I Iransport 
trecentl, ae, a, three hunJred 
tr68 (m., f.), tria (n.), three 
tributum, 2, trihute 
Trinobantes, 3, plur., a tribe in 

Essex 



triplex (triplic-), 3, adj., triple 

triquetrus, a, um, triangular 

triumpho, l, I triutnph, exult 

tropacum, 2, trophy 

trucido, I, I slaughter, murder 

tu, thou, you 

tum, then (=ai that titne or there- 

upon) 
tumulus, 2, mound 
turbulentus, a, um, rottgh, turhulent 
turris (Gen. Plur. turrium), 3, turret 
tutuB, a, um, safe 
tuuB, a, um, thy, your 



u. 



ubi, where 

ulluB, a, um, any (Gen. and Dat. 

Sing. irregular) 
uhnus, 2, f., ehn-tree 
umbra, i, shade, shadow 
una, together; unacum, togetherwith 
unda, i, wave 
unde, whence 
undecimus, a, um, eleventh 
flniversuB, a, um, all together 

[universal] 



anuB, a, um (Gen. and Dat. Sing. 

irregular), one 
urba (urb-), 3, city [urban] 
urna, l, urn 
ursus, 2, bear 

usitatus, a, um, used, usual, common 
usque ad, right on till 
ut, how or as 
iitili», 3, adj., useful 



V. 



vacca, I, cov) 

vaco, I, I amjree [vacant] 

vadum, 2, shallow plcue, shoal,ford 

validus, a, um, strong 

vallum, 2, rampart 

varius, a, um, varied 

vaBto, I, I lay waste [de-vast-ate] 

vastus, a, um, wild, waste [vast] 

vehiculum, 2, carriage [vehicle] 

vel, or 

velum, 2, sail ; vela dare, to set sail 

velut, as, even as [vel, even ; ut, aj] 

venaticus, a, um, connected with 

hunling 
Vcneti, 2, pl., a tribe on the Wcst 

Coast of Gaul 



venia, l, pardon 

Venta Belgaium, i, IVinchester 

ventus, 2, wind 

venum-do, -dare, -dedi, / sell 

\yk\\\xm, for sale \ do, I offer^^ 
v6ruB, a, um, true; vera, the truth 

(lit. true things) ; ver5, in 

truth, indeed 
vesper, 2, evening or evening star 

[vespers] 
vester, vestra, vestrum, your (of 

sevcral persons) 
vesligium, 2, vestige, trate 
veslimentum, 2,garment [vestmentj 
vetcranus, a, um, veteran, old 
vcto, I, I forbid 



ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARY 



»57 



vexC, I, L annoy, vex 

via, I , r»ad, way ; d$ via, from the 
road; in viam me do, L give 
myself to the road, L start ; 
intcr viam, on the way 

viclito, I, I live 

victor (victOr-), 3, victor 

Ticteria, I, victory 

vicus, 2, village 

vigintl (indeclinable), twenty 

viila, I, country-house, villa 

viola, I, Triolet 

violo, I, l violai4 



vir, 2, man 

virtus (virtQt-), 3, pliuk, couragt 

[virtue] 
visitd, I , / visit 
vita, I, life 
vitS, I, L avoid 
vitrea, 2, pl. n., glass vesseh 
vitrum, 2, woad 
vii, scarcely, hardly 
vobis, to yoit ; vobiscuni, witfi you 
volito, I, L fly 
\b%, ypit fplural) 
vulims (vulner), 3, wound [vulner- 

able] 



W. J»lly &* Stnt, Printers. 38 B^idge Strttt. Aitrdttn 



ORA MARITIMA SERIES 

EDITED BY 

Professor E. A. SONNENSCHEIN, D.Litt. 

Published by Messrs. Swan Sonnenschein & Co., Ltd., London, and 
The Macmilt.an Co., New York. 

Each of ihe Readers in this series consists of a continuous 
story written in the language to be studied, and so constructed as 
to form the basis of a systematic study of Grammar. They thus 
combine the interest and vitality of a real story with a thorough 
training in the fundamentals of the language concerned. 

The seiies at present contains the following volumes : — 

ORA MARITIMA: a Latin Story for Be- 

ginners, with Grammar and Exercises. By Professor SON 
NENSCHEIN, (Thirtieth Thousand, croffn %t'0, price 2/., subject 
to discount.) 

The scene of the story is laid on the South Coast of England, 
and includes a sketch of the ancient Britons and of Ca;sar's 
invasions of Britain. 

OPINIONS 

" The book is just Al, clearly right in conception and admirably 
execiUed." — P. A. Barnett, M.A., H.IVI. Chief Inspeclor for the Training 
of Teachers. 

" We have adopted both Ora Maritima and Pro Patria in our Latin 
classes at Manchester Grammar School, and have never had reason to 
regret Iheir adoption. Both books have interest and continuily, and both 
lend themselvcs excellenlly to oral practice." — J. L. Paton, M.A., High 
Master of the Manchester Grammar School. 

" The most altractive introduction to Latin that has come under my 
notice, and I have seen most of them in the secondary schools which I 
inspect." — JOHN Keru, LL.D., late H.M. Chief Inspector of Schoois and 
Training Colleges in Scotland. 

" It makes a new departure in the teaching of Latin thit ought to be 
productive of great good. I am in entire sympathy with its meihod." — 
A. E. ScouGAL, H.M. Senior Chief Inspector of Schools 'n Scotland. 

" I have used Ora Maritima in actual teaching, and have found it both 
interestingand instructive to the pupil." — ProfessorJ. P. PojTGATE, Litt.D. 

" Ora Maridma proves an idcal book for a first reader." — VV. H. D. 
RousE, Litt. D., Head Master of the Perse School, Cambridge. 



" Exactly what is needed to strike a mean Vjctween the wholly conversa- 
tional method, which means no grammar, and the solely grammatical 
mcthod, which means no specch or life." — Sybil F. Partriugk, Principal 
of St. Mary's Hall, Liverpool. 

" This is a charming book. We know no better epithet by which to 
descrilie such an introduction to the Latin tongue. . . . It is giving a 
strong recommendation to say, as we gladly do, that our author has given 
us the ideal book which he formerly described." — Sccondary Educaticn 

" VVe can conceive no more delightful book for the induction of youth 
into the paths of Latin." — The Monthly Register. 

" An interesling experiment, ably carried ow\.."—Journal of Education. 

" It aims al teaching a little thoroughly, and it succeeds." — School 
World. 

" An cxlremely simplc and interesting book." — Literary World. 

" The drill exercises are specinlly to be commended. In the presence 
of the impending campaign against classical education, it behoves its de- 
fenders to furbish up their weapons." — Saturday Review. 

" Ora Maritima does for Latin what the modern oral methods do for 
French and German, i.e., it makes the beginner realise that the language 
13 really a vehicle of expression, whereby common-sense nolions can be 
conveyed. From personal experience I can testify how a few weeks are 
sufficient to gain this all-important idea ; and it is worlh adding that in a 
school which I have recently inspected a small hoy of eleven employed his 
leisure time in working ihrough Ora Maritima to the end, and then canie 
to his master for the sequel Pro Patria. There was no need to lell that 
boy that Latin is someihing more ihan a phalanx of declinable nouns and 
verbs." — Alfred Hughes, M.A., Professor of Educationin the University 
of Hirmingham. 

PRO PATRIA : a Latin Story, being a sequel 

to Ora Afariti»ia, with Grammar and E.\ercises to the end 
of the Regular Accidence. By Professor Sonnenschein. 
{Tenth Thousand, croiun %to, pricg 2s. 6d., subject to discount.) 

The story includes a sketch of the history of Britain under the 
Romans and Saxons, down to the introduction of Christianity. 
The latter part of the story recounts the history of the Boer War 
down to June, 1900. 

OPINIONS 

"The books are admirable, and under the guidance of a skilful teacher 
their use in class is followed by excellent results. — Professor Michael 
E. Sadler, LL.D., Manchester. 

" I have had both books prescribed for use in our earliest standards. 
They were acknowledgcd by ihe Committee which passed them to be 
unequalled for the inieresting way in which they presented the subject. 
I think no praise is too high for them." — W. G. Wedderspoon, M.A., 
H.M. Inspector of European Schools and Training Colleges, Burma. 

2 



" I have started my own small boys in Latin with Oia Marititna and 
Pio Patria, and am delighted with both books : they irdicate a method 
which is attractive to th;^ child without being superficial." — Sir Arthur 
IIORT, M.A. , Ilarrow School. 

" In a long experience I have found Pro Patria quite the best book 
which I have ever come across for arousing and sustaining the interest 
of small boys in their elementary stage of Latin Translation." — The Rev. 
Piiii.ir Crick, M.A., St. Ronan's, Worthing. 

THE GREEK WAR OF iNDEPEND- 

ENCE. The Story of the War of Indcpcndence ('1821- 
1827) is told in classical Greek for the use of beginners, with 
Notes and Exercises. By C. D Chamber§, M.A. {jCrown 
8tio, price y., suhject to disrount^ 

OPINIONS 

" Felicitous in design and able in excculion. There is, in our opinion, 
a future for books of this type — books classical in language and m ilern 
in subject-matter. As a specimen of Mr. Chambers' sUill in reprodiicing 
the grave Thucydidean slyle, the account of Byron's arrival in Greece and 
of his too early death is e\ce\\en\.."—JouriialofEdiicaiion. 

" Most ably planned and most successfully executed. It gives reality 
and intcrest to the early study of Greek." — Educational Times. 

" A mo>t vahiable schoolbook. Tlie narrative \-> bright and interest- 
ing, and well illustraled wilh maps and phoiographs. \Ve strongly 
recommend the book to all schoolmastcrs."— '1 he Oxford Magazine. 

" The tcxt makes a capiial reader." — Guardian. 

JUST PUBLISHED 
AM RHEIN : a German Story for Beginners, 

with Grammar and E.xercises in Conversation, Free Com- 
position, and Translation. By Professor K.ARL WlCHMANN, 
Ph.D. {Crow?t ?)V0, price 2s., subject to discount.) 

The scene of the story is laid in a country parsonage on the 
Rhine ; in the latter part of the book tlie story of Siegfried and 
the Niljclungen is recounted. 

/.\" rREF.l IL'lTln.y 
A FRENCH STORY FOR BEGINNERS, on 

similar lincs to thc ahovc. 

3 



^ PARALLEL 
GRAMMAR 5ERIE5. 



EDITED Br 



Ppofessop E. A. SONNENSCHEIN, D.Uitt. OXon. 



RECENT OPINIONS FRO.H 

The Head-master of King Edward's School, Birmingham ; 
The Head-mistress of the Wimbledon High School for Girls : 

" The Latin Accidence of the Parallel Grammir Series is in use through- 
out the King EdArard's School, Birminghara, and the Greek Accideoce oa the 
Classical Side. I am dislinct.ly of opinion that one and the same Accidence 
should be prescnbed in every schaol learning the language, and that the 
Parallel Grammar Accidences are the right ones to prescribe. Gram- 
matical curiosities are relegatea to their proper place, and the normal in- 
flexione of the language are presentcd in a clear and orderly manner without 
Bacrificing practical convenience to the suppoaed reeiuirements of scieutific 
philology. When the Greek and the Latin Accidence of this series are used 
Bide by side, the f urther esonomy eflected by the ' Parallel ' system is 
realised." — R. Cary Gilson, M A., Head-master of the Schools of King 
Edward VL in Birminghara ; late Assistant Maater at Harrow, and Fellow of 
Triuity CoUege, Cambridge. (Feb. 26th, 1904.) 

"The Parallel Grammari — English, Latin, Greek, French, and German — 
have been used in this School, each from the time of ita publication. These 
Grammars are acknowledged to be in the front rauk as regards scholarship, 
and they have also thc merits of clearness and compactness. — The Parallel 
method is important as leadiug to a real grasp of principles and economising 
the learner'8 time. The result of using the Parallel Grammirs exclusively 
has in the case of this School been altogether satisfactory, and, where pupiU 
of linguistio talent were concerned. adrairablysuccessfuL" — Editu Hastings, 
Head-mistresa of the Wimbledon High School for Girls. (Feb. 23rd, 1904.) 

SELECr OPINIONS ON THB SERIES AS A WHOLE. 

'• We have for 8ome years been using the Parallel Grammars and ReaJera 
and Writers intended to be studied along with thera. We were led to intro- 
duce these text-books from a sense of the souidness of tbe educational prin- 
ciples on which they were based ; experience has now tau.^ht m to value them 
also for the care and consistency with which these principles are carricd out. 
We are convinccd that it is an incalculable gain to the c.iuse of systematic 
instruction in our school that we are usiug books which enable us to preserve 
uniformity in the grammar teachiug of the languages, as well as to connect 
coherently translation and composition with this gramraar tcaching." — The 
Rev. A. JamsonSmith, U.A., Head-masterof K.E.S.,CampHill, Birmingham. 



" After recommending the Parallel Gramviar Seriet in many quartere, I can- 
not remember any one who was disappointed, or to whom the working out of 
the same system through various languages did not come as something of a 
revelation, for which tbey were intensely grateful. I am sure that no teacher 
who had once tried the effect of their arrangement of Conditional Sentencet 
as against the traditional arrangement could be blind to the superiority of the 
former." — W. H. Seckeb, M.A., Oxon., Aysgarth School, Yorkshire. 

" A year ago I expressed my unqualified approval of the Parallel Orammar 
Series ; since then my admiration for it has only increased, in proportion as I 
have more fully understood the principles on which it is based and their appli- 
cation. Mr. Sonnenschein has deserved well of his country in taking tlie 
initiative in this work, which he has succeeded in carrying to a happy is^ue. 
Shall we ever have a similar series for our own country ? That day, the 
teaching of languages will have taken an immense step forward." — Dr. J. 
Kkelhof, Professor at the Athdn^e Koyal, Tongrefl, Belgium, in Revue de 
Vtnstruction publique (Translated). 

" One of the most pressing needs of the day, in view of the muUiplication 
of school Bubjects and the increased strain which it puts upon the pupil, is 
concentration and simplification in the methods of teaching. What we have 
lost in extension we niust gain in intention, as the logicians would say. And 
among the attempts which are being made to meet this demand, a high place 
must be accorded to the movement started in this country sorre years ago for 
unification in the field of grammar teaching. Grammars are many, but 
grammar is one ; that is to say, though the varielies of usage in different 
languages are infinitely numerous, it is possible to treat them from a common 
point of view — to classify them on the basis of a common scheme of analysis 
and terminology. The gain to the teacher ought to be enormous. Instead of 
re classifying the facts of syntax for each separate language according to the 
sweet will of the framers of individual grammars, a single classification serves 
for all the languages to be learned ; and this scheme, by repetition in connec- 
tion with each new language studied, becomes part aad parcel of the mental 
outfit of the pupil — a solid rock on which he stands firm in face of the be- 
wildering complexities of human speech. The old method involved a continual 
re-adjustment of the register ; and its evila were many, as Matthew Arnold 
recognised. In our own time a serious attempt has been made to remedy its 
defects in Professor Sonnenschein'» Parallel Grammar Series.^' — Literature, 
Feb. lOth, 1900. 

" We have had frequent occasion to express our opinion of the varioua 
volumes in this very useful series, and of the general features which charac- 
terise them all ; their spirit and system are now so well known to all teachers 
that it is hardly necessary to repeat those observations. The principle of 
familiarising a pupil with passages for translation before he has mastered 
many details of grammar, of bringing him to a knowledge of rulca through 
the language from which experience collects them, rather than equipping him 
with a mass of words and forms long before he meeta them in the literature — 
this principle is gradually growing to be more and more widely acknowledged 
as a sound one. Few can doubt the very great advantage of having some 
general principles established, which can be illustrated in different languages, 
either by way of similarity or contraat. It is on this system of proceeding 
from the known to the unknown that the Parallel Grammar Series is baaed." — 
Educational Review, 



I^ GREEK. 

Qreek Qrammar. By Prof, E. A. Sonnenscheix, D.Litt., Oxon., 
Uaiversity of Hirmingham. 4-<. 6il. ; or (separately), Accidencc (inchuling 
Supplenwjit on irregularities in Declension andComparison), 29. ; Supplement 
aloQe, G(i.; Syntax, 23. Gd. 

A Parallel of Greek and Latin Syntax. By C. II. St. L. Russell, 
M.A., Asaistant ilaster at Clifton College. 33. 6d. 

First Qreek Reader and Wrlter. By J. E. Sandvs, Litt.D., Public 
Oiator in the Uuiversity of Ciimbridge. 2s. Cd. 

LATIN. 

Latla Qrammar. Ey Prof. E. A. Sonnekschein, D.Litt., O.xon., Univer- 
sity of Birmiagham. 3s. ; or (separately), Accidence, Is. 6d. ; Syntax, Is. Gd. 

Flrst Latln Reader and Wrlter. By C. M. Di.x, M.A., Oxon. 23. 

Second Latin Reader and Wrlter. By C. M. Dix, M.A. la. 6d. 

Third Latin Reader aad Wrlter. ByC. M. Di.x, M.A. 2i. 

Fourth Latin Reader and Writer {" Llvy Lessons "). By J. C. 

NICOL, M.A.,Caatab., late Fellow of Trinity Hall, Head-master of Ports- 
moiith Grammar School, and the Rev. J. HUNTER Smith, M.A., Oxon., late 
Aasistant Master in King Edward'8 School, Birmingham. 23. 

ENGLISH. 

Eagllsh Grammar. By J. II.vll, M.A., Head-ma.ster of the Hulme 
Grammar School, ManchcBter ; Miss A. J. CoopEB, F.C.P. ; and the Editob 
OF THE Seiues. 28. ; or (separately), Accidence, Is. ; Analysis and Syntax, 

l8. 

Advaaced Eaglish Syatax. By. C. T. Onions, M.A., Lond , of theStaff 
of the Oxford English Dictionary. 28. 6d. Second Edition. 

Engllsh Examples aad Exerclses. Part I., by Miss M. A. Woods. Is. 
Part II., by Miss A. J. COOPER, F.C.P. Is. 

Steps to Eagllsb Parslag and Aaalysls. By Miss E. M. Rams.-vy 

and Miss C. L. Hamsay. Vol. I., Elementary, Is. Od. Vol. IL, Further 
Exercites, Is. 6d. 

FRENCH. 

Freach Grammar. By L. M. Moriakty, M.A., Oxon., Assistant Master at 
Harrow ; late Professor of French in King'8 College, London. 33., or 
(separately), Accidence, Is. 6d. ; Syntax, Is. 6d. 

Preparatory French Course. By Miss A. M. Zweifel. Is. 6d. New 
edition, revised and largely re-written, 1903. 

Flrst French Reader and Writer. By R. J. Moeich, late Assistant 
Maater at Clifton, and W. S. Lyon, M.A., Oxon. 2s. 

tSs' Fop Revised Edition of this Work, see below. 
New Flrst French Reader and Writcr. By l^iortssor R. J. MORICU, 
University of Graz. 2s. 



Second French Reader and Wrlter. By ProfeBsor P. E. E. BAnBlEB, 

UQivursity College, Cardiff. 2s. 

Third French Reader and Writer. By L. Baebe, B.A , Head-master 

<jf the Modern Language Department ia the Glasgow Academy. 2s. 

Advanced French Composition. By TI. E. Berthon, Hon. M.A , 
Oxon., Taylorian Teacher of French in the Uuiversity of Ojcfurd, and C. T. 
Onioxs, M.A., Lond. 23. Gd. 

GERMAN. 

Oerman Grammar. By Prof. Kuso Meyer, Ph.D., Univcrsity of Liver- 
pool. 3s. ; or (separately), Accidence, Is. 6d. ; Syntax, Is. Gd. 

First German Readcr and Writer. By the Editoe of the Sebies. 
l8. 6d. 

Second Gcrman Reader and Writer. By (he Rev. W. S. Macgowax, 
M. A., LL.U., Priucii»al of St. Andrevv's CoUege, Grahaujstown, Cape 
Colony. 2s. 

Third Oerman Reader and Writer. By Prof. GEonoE Fiedler, 
Ph.D., University of Birmingham. 2s. 

Fourth German Writer. By R. Gordo.v Ilouxn, M.A., Oxon., Moden 
Language Master iu Bromsgrove Scuool. 2-*. 

In Preparation. — Advanced German Compositioa. By Prof. Kcno 
Meyer, Ph.D., Uuiversity of Liverpool. 

SPANISH. WELSH, DANONORWEGIAN. 

Spanish Grammar. By the late H. Bdtleb Clarke, M.A., Oxon., Fellow 
of St. John's CoUege, Oxford, late Taylorian Teacher of Spanish. 4s. 6d. 

First Spanish Readei and Writer. By H. Butler Clarke, M.A. 2s. 

Welsh Grammar. By Prof. E. Anwyl, M.A., Oxon., University CoUege, 
Aberystwyth. os. ; or (separately), Accidence, 2s. 6d. : Syntax, 2s. 6d. 

Dano-Norwegian Reader. With Gramraatical Outline. By J. Y. 
Bargent, M.A., Oxon., late Fellow and Tutor of Migdalen CoUege, Oxford. 
3s. 6d. 



y IS" Single Copies of any Yolume will be sent post free to any 
' teacher on receipt of half its publishcd price. KEYS to the Latin and 

German Readers and Writers may be had by teachers «n direct applioa- 

tion to the publishers. 



LoNDOS: SWAN SONNENSCHEIN i CO., Ltd. 
Ni-.w York: THE MACMILLAN 00. 



PA 
2095 
365 
1909 



Sonnenschein, fidward Adolf 
Ora maritiraa 6th ed. 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 



i 



